no title

TST ISSUES BRIEFS

[A compendium of issues briefs prepared by the United Nations inter-agency technical support team for the United Nations General Assembly Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals.]

United Nations General Assembly Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals

Compendium of TST Issues Briefs

October 2014

This document is a compilation of issues briefs produced by the United Nations Technical Support Team in support of the General Assembly Open Working Group.

The Technical Support Team was established pursuant to paragraph 249 of the Rio+20 outcome document, the Future We Want. The TST is co-chaired by UN DESA and UNDP, with more than 40 entities from the United Nations system as members.

This document was prepared by UN DESA without formal editing.

Disclaimer

The views and opinions expressed do not necessarily represent those of the Secretariat of the United Nations; the designations employed or terminology used concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations. The designations of country groups in the text, figures or tables are intended solely for analytical convenience and do not necessarily express a judgment about the stage reached by a particular country or area in the development process. Mention of names of firms and commercial products does not imply endorsement of the United Nations.

Cover image credit: Earth Revisited, by Susan/Cathairstudios https://www.flickr.com/photos/texturecrazy/3822723997/ Creative Commons license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/legalcode

Table of Contents

Issues Brief 1: CONCEPTUAL ISSUES ...................................................................................................... 1 Issues Brief 2: POVERTY ERADICATION .................................................................................................. 8 Issues Brief 3: FOOD SECURITY AND NUTRITION .................................................................................. 13 Issues Brief 4: SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE ......................................................................................... 21 Issues Brief 5: DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT............................................. 29 Issues Brief 6: WATER AND SANITATION .............................................................................................. 36 Issues Brief 7: EMPLOYMENT AND DECENT WORK .............................................................................. 44 Issues Brief 8: SOCIAL PROTECTION ...................................................................................................... 51 Issues Brief 9: EDUCATION AND CULTURE ............................................................................................ 58 Issues Brief 10: HEALTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT ............................................................... 66 Issues Brief 11: POPULATION DYNAMICS ............................................................................................. 73 Issues Brief 12: INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINED ECONOMIC GROWTH, INDUSTRIALIZATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT ........................................................................................................ 81 Issues Brief 13: MACROECONOMIC POLICY QUESTIONS (INCLUDING INTERNATIONAL TRADE, INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM AND EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY) .................................... 91 Issues Brief 14: ENERGY ........................................................................................................................ 99 Issues Brief 15: MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION; GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT .................................................................................................................................... 107 Issues Brief 16: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION, KNOWLEDGE-SHARING AND CAPACITY-BUILDING ............................................................................................................................................ 114 Issues Brief 17: NEEDS OF COUNTRIES IN SPECIAL SITUATIONS - AFRICAN COUNTRIES, LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES, LANDLOCKED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES, AS WELL AS THE SPECIFIC CHALLENGES FACING MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES .................. 122 Issues Brief 18: HUMAN RIGHTS INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO DEVELOPMENT .................................... 139 Issues Brief 19: GLOBAL GOVERNANCE .............................................................................................. 147 Issues Brief 20: SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND HUMAN SETTLEMENTS .................................................... 153 Issues Brief 21: SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT ......................................................................................... 160 Issues Brief 22: SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION, INCLUDING CHEMICALS AND WASTE ................................................................................................................................................. 167 Issues Brief 23: CLIMATE CHANGE AND DISASTER RISK REDUCTION ................................................. 175 Issues Brief 24: OCEANS AND SEAS ..................................................................................................... 182 Issues Brief 25: FORESTS ..................................................................................................................... 190 Issues Brief 26: BIODIVERSITY ............................................................................................................. 199 Issues Brief 27: PROMOTING EQUALITY, INCLUDING SOCIAL EQUITY ............................................... 206 Issues Brief 28: GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT .............................................. 215 Issues Brief 29: CONFLICT PREVENTION, POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING AND THE PROMOTION OF DURABLE PEACE, RULE OF LAW AND GOVERNANCE .......................................................................... 225

Issues Brief 1: CONCEPTUAL ISSUES

1

I.

Stocktaking

One of the main outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), held in Rio de Janeiro in June 2012, was the agreement by Member States to launch a process to develop a set of sustainable development goals (SDGs). The Rio+20 Outcome provides that the goals should be action-oriented, concise and easy to communicate, limited in number, aspirational, global in nature and universally applicable, while taking into account different national realities2. It also calls for the goals to "...address and incorporate in a balanced way all three dimensions of sustainable development and their interlinkages. They should be coherent with and integrated into the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015."

The outcome document further specifies that SDGs should: - be a useful tool for pursuing focused and coherent action on sustainable development;3 - address and be focused on priority areas for the achievement of sustainable development, guided by the outcome document;

- contribute to the full implementation of the outcomes of all major summits in the economic, social and environmental fields;

- serve as a driver for implementation and mainstreaming of sustainable development in the United Nations system as a whole.4

The challenge facing the international community is to establish global sustainable development goals that fully respect all the Rio Principles; take into account different national circumstances, capacities and priorities; are consistent with international law; and build upon commitments and the many goals and targets the international community has already agreed upon, in particular the MDGs.

The MDGs demonstrated that international goals, targets and indicators can galvanize action and political will towards a core set of development priorities. As the OWG considers sustainable development goals, governments can draw on the lessons learnt from the MDGs. In general, the MDGs are widely recognized for serving as a rallying point for different actors in combating poverty in its various forms and manifestations. The MDGs did not provide specific guidance on the kinds of actions needed to attain the goals. Some argue that the lack of specifics on means and actions to achieve the MDGs reflects a neglect of structural causes of such problems as poverty, inequalities and hunger; others see this focus on ends as a strength, allowing maximum policy space to individual countries, thus "respecting national policies". Another lesson learned is that it is better, in many cases, to frame the goals in terms of meaningful outcomes, such as a measure of actual learning rather than merely years of schooling, as well as to disaggregate them, e.g., on a gender basis as in the case of education. It is recognized that data constraints are a major factor in the framing of goals, though goals themselves can catalyse investment and capacity building for data collection.

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. Contributors to this brief include: DESA, ESCAP, FAO, IFAD, ILO, ITU, OHCHR, OHRLLS, UNDP, UNEP, UNESCO, UNFPA, UN-Habitat, UNICEF, UNOOSA,UNV, UN-Women, PBSO,

The simplicity and brevity of the MDGs are also seen as having contributed to their success. On the other hand, holding countries with very different starting points to undifferentiated global targets has been criticized. Also, there are questions whether it is appropriate to measure countries' performance solely in pass/fail terms, ignoring the rate of improvement. The table below summarizes some of the strengths and weaknesses of the MDGs, as well possible implications for SDGs.

Table 1: Weaknesses and strengths of MDGs

Strengths Weaknesses Possible implications for SDGs

o Multilateral reference point for diverse actors o Normative shift: poverty is morally unacceptable o Importance of a global partnership for development o Define human development outcomes, rather than the opportunities/capacities to overcome poverty o De-emphasize structural determinants of development and economic growth o Environment/sustainability and economic dimensions poorly integrated o Do not address all three dimensions of sustainable development, nor inter-linkages

o Exclude some important issues outlined in the Millennium Declaration, e.g. peace, governance, human rights o Focus limited to developing countries and aid, not universal o SDGs should articulate SD in a unifying manner o Need to reflect role of development, growth and structural transformation in poverty eradication o Three dimensions of SD adequately integrated in framing of SDGs o Difficulty in framing security/governance goal, but may need to reflect concerns related to violence and conflict-affected countries. o Build on existing framework, broaden forms of international cooperation

o Targets and indicators to guide and motivate policy decisions; promoting accountability o Simple, clear and concise targets that are easy to communicate o Failure to account for differences in initial conditions o Limited unifying theory on the underlying structural causes of poverty; weak on social justice - rights, equality, vulnerability and exclusion

o Perceived to be unbalanced in treatment of national and international responsibilities o Imprecise targets were set for some dimensions, e.g. several MDG 8 targets and target for reducing the number of slum dwellers o Need to address underlying societal drivers like consumption, lifestyles; also address values o Reflect equality, inclusion and rights approaches o SDG process is multilateral, and universally applicable but detailed targets probably from expert process

o Incentives for more and better data on poverty o Focus on monitoring can eclipse analysis of reasons for success/failure o Little attention to quality o Measuring 'on-track' and 'off-track' progress failed adequately to account for considerable progress made in countries despite not reaching the target o Relatively weak accountability mechanisms o New data needs including on quality; beyond GDP o Need to disaggregate data to reflect underlying inequalities o More clarity on how to tailor global targets to national realities and conditions o Need for science-based information building and knowledge sharing

There is a general agreement that the framing of the SDGs should be broader than that of the MDGs, while recognizing that the SDGs are only a tool to focus and mobilize efforts and to measure progress towards sustainable development, and not an end in themselves. Poverty eradication must remain the overriding objective. Furthermore, there is an urgent need for sustainably managing the natural resources and ecosystems that support development.

The social dimension of the MDGs - the eradication of poverty and promotion of health, nutrition, education and social development - needs to retain its prominence in the post-2015 development agenda, while greater emphasis needs to be placed on addressing inequalities both within and among countries. There is also a need to make specific provision for countries lagging behind, as well as for the inclusion of marginalized groups of society in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the SDGs.

Over time, the concept of development has broadened to encompass not only growth or income considerations but also human development, and, more recently, freedom and personal security. The argument has been made that progress towards development goals will severely lag without progress on issues such as peace and security, elimination of violence, gender equality and women's empowerment, inclusive politics and human rights, and rule of law.

II.

Overview of proposals

Several groups or institutions have already proposed frameworks, as well specific potential development goals. In addition, preliminary views of Member States are summarized in the Secretary-General's initial input to the OWG6. A comprehensive list of all the proposals can be found on a number of websites.7 Elements of some indicative proposals for goals are described below.

A key feature of SDGs is that they are to address and incorporate in a balanced way all three dimensions of sustainable development. The important point is that the ensemble of SDGs should achieve the requisite balance; it need not be achieved - and may not be appropriate - in every goal.

One representative proposal envisages three categories of goals to reconcile people's aspirations of well-being and prosperity with the imperative to protect the natural resources on which human life depends: 8 goals to meet basic human development, e.g. education, with very few implications for environmental sustainability; goals where human development outcomes and environmental sustainability must be considered together, e.g. food, water, and energy; and goals on promoting global public goods in the area of resource use. Along similar lines, another proposal seeks to address four interconnected objectives: economic development (including the end of extreme poverty), social inclusion, environmental sustainability, and good governance including personal security.9 There are also sets of goals designed to facilitate progress towards MDGs and to guide

post-2015 development agenda, Review of the contributions of the MDG Agenda to foster development: Lessons for the post-2015 UN development agenda, Discussion Note (2012).

6 Initial Input of the Secretary-General to the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals (A/67/634).

7 http://tracker.post2015.org/index.html and http://www.sustainabledevelopment2015.org/einventory/searchinventory.php 8 How to build sustainable development, goals: integrating human development and environmental sustainability in a new global agenda (ODI, 2013) http://www.odi.org.uk/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi- work in fragile and conflict-affected States, such as the Peacebuilding and Statebuilding Goals (PSGs).10 Many of the proposals for future SDGs call for gender equality and women's empowerment to be a stand-alone goal and to be integrated across goals.

A preliminary report, "The Global Conversation Begins" was published on 21 March 2013, based on consultations on the post-2015 development agenda involving more than 300,000 people and 36 national consultations.11 In addition, MyWorld2015.org is gathering global preferences online.

Overall, most proposals are in favour of a set of limited, measurable and concrete goals, keeping the set-up that made the MDGs successful. Most proposals aim to eradicate poverty in the context of sustainable development, with poverty and environmental sustainability as "two sides of the same coin". There is also a wide view that the future framework should take into account issues that are not dealt with adequately or at all in the current framework, such as jobs, social protection, inequalities and exclusion, governance, security, conflict, violence against women, civic engagement, culture, and education beyond and prior to the primary level. Further, many stakeholders are calling for universal goals with national targets and timelines and implementation adapted to national and sub-national circumstances, in addition to a core set of common indicators across the different dimensions of sustainable development. Finally, there are strong calls for the next agenda to be more clearly people-centred, people-led and accountable, in both its design and implementation.

III.

The way forward

Consistent with para 247 of the Rio+20 Outcome Document, the framework for the SDGs should, among other things, address the questions below.

1. What are the characteristics of the conceptual framework that underpins the SDGs? SDGs should embody a conceptual framework that guides the world towards poverty eradication and universal human development while respecting the Earth's limited and fragile natural resource base. Crucially, many elements of such a conceptual framework are already detailed in the Rio Outcome document as well as other conference outcomes and international agreements. The UN Task Team's 2012 publication, Realizing the future we want for all, enlarges on these points from the perspective of the UN system.

The overarching goal is sustainable development guided by a vision of where we wish to be in 20-30 years. What are the negative features which should be addressed (e.g., extreme poverty, hunger and malnutrition, infant, child and maternal mortality, water scarcity, vulnerability, including to natural hazards), and what are the positive elements that should be reinforced (e.g., access to education, universal access to health, productive employment and decent work, access to energy, productive capacities and employment opportunities, resilience, protection of the natural resource base and ecosystems, etc.). On the basis of these considerations, the international community can take the next step to formulate transformational development goals: universal goals that create a common vision and solidarity.

In line with the broad conceptual framework, one option is that the SDGs address the drivers (root causes) of changes, the social, economic and environmental drivers towards long term sustainability. A more integrative or systemic approach, rather than a single-issue based approach, could promote the identification and consideration of causal pathways and linkages. Another option is to focus on clearly stated development outcomes, rather than "drivers of change" or "processes". The options can also be combined.

2. How to prioritize SDGs? The articulation of the conceptual framework can determine ways to prioritise goals. Such a framework could, among other things, outline how social, economic and environmental dimensions are linked, and identify policies that could strengthen linkages to foster sustainable development pathways. Similarly, consensus-building on selection criteria early on in the process could also facilitate the prioritization process. Selection criteria could include, among others, clear links to MDGs and potential to build on what has been achieved so far in implementing MDGs, addressing the unrealized targets and groups so far excluded from progress, building on existing and/or national goals to minimize the transaction costs, and availability of reliable trend data sets.

Admittedly, it may be difficult to find priorities that are equally relevant for all countries. Options to address this issue include: (i) implicitly or explicitly choose goals that are priorities for different sets of countries; and (ii) formulate goals sufficiently broadly that they cover all countries, but still allow differentiation in targets and indicators by country. The two options could also be combined. In particular, option (i) on its own carries two risks: it would lead to an overly large set of goals, and the goals would not be universal as detailed in the Rio Outcome document. Alternatively, prioritization of SDGs could be left to the individual countries which will assess their own stage of development, the key development gaps they face, the extent to which they can deal with those gaps, and the socio-economic development objectives they have set out in their own national development strategies.

3. How do we address universality while taking into account countries' different levels of development and national circumstances?

"Global in nature" and "universally applicable to all countries" are distinct concepts. The MDGs were global in nature, but most were not universally applicable to all countries. The framework of the SDGs should be universal, but at the same time adaptable to national priorities, capacities and levels of development. The SDG discussion also reveals that the issue of social equity and inequalities within countries (intra-national equality and equity) has gained currency, reflecting concern that the goals should work to the benefit of the lowest quintiles and most excluded groups, which was not always considered explicitly with the MDGs. The broader, international dimension of equity, articulated in the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities (CBDR), will also need to be considered, especially in the differentiation of targets and insofar as targets have a bearing on protection of the global commons.

Options could include: (i) Common set of goals coupled with the adoption of differentiated targets and/or timelines calibrated to level of development and national circumstances; (ii) Common set of goals with multiple targets and indicators under each (a dashboard or menu) from which countries themselves could prioritize when devising their own development agenda, in keeping with their level of development and national circumstances. In both cases the goals would be universal while the exact targets would be determined at the national level. Each of these options could be underpinned by the adoption of a core, relatively small set of common indicators on which all countries would commit to report (including some of those on which country data is already widely available under the MDGs).

4. How to address the means of implementation/enablers? Many countries will require external support in order to implement the SDGs. Therefore, the issue of means of implementation must be given due consideration, including ODA, trade, investment, technology transfer, and capacity building. It will have to be decided whether the means of implementation are included as a separate goal (as in the case of MDG 8), or as part of each newly-defined SDG. The lessons learnt with respect to MDG 8, on the Global Partnership, will need to inform the discussion on this point. At a minimum, the means of implementation should be consistent with commitments countries have already made in other fora; and could express explicitly the ambition to improve global governance mechanisms to manage better the essential global public goods. The work of the Expert Committee on a Sustainable Development Financing Strategy can be expected to feed in, at the appropriate time, into the discussion on means of implementation for the SDGs. There is also a need to recognise the key role of science, technology and innovation as a means of implementation in achieving sustainable development.

4. How could the goals balance and integrate the three dimensions of sustainable development? Achieving this balance could be done for example by: (i) Integrating the social, economic and environmental dimension within each SDG, possibly through associated targets. One of the weaknesses of this approach is that the economic dimension is, in existing initiatives, insufficiently covered, and usually reflected in the form of efficiency targets. (ii) Compiling a set or cluster of SDGs that each address different dimensions of sustainable development. In this model overall balance would be sought in the whole set of goals. The weakness of this approach is that it addresses all dimensions of sustainable development as separate pillars and does not explicitly acknowledge the inter-linkages among them. At the very least, such inter-linkages would need to be considered in the framing of appropriate targets. (iii) Combining the best aspects of both above-mentioned approaches. One way of developing the SDGs could be to develop a few key goals that would combine all three dimensions of sustainable development within each goal and to complement these with narrower goals that stress one or another dimension in particular.

5. How to build on existing goals and targets? In addition to the MDGs, there exist many international development goals for specific sectors or topics (e.g. education, energy, biodiversity) whose time horizon runs into the post-2015 era. In the interests of policy coherence, the relationship between SDGs and these sectoral development goal sets needs to be addressed explicitly. There are probably three main options for this: (i) A new SDG could be based on existing sectoral sets. However, elevating one goal from the sectoral set implies downgrading the other goals. This option is thus only viable if there is clear agreement on the priority goal. (ii) A second option is to create sector-specific aggregate SDGs. However, such an overarching goal could be overloaded, too complex to be effective, and vague. Hence, under this option increased efforts have to go into formulating concrete, simple goals. (iii) A third option would be to group the various aspects covered by different sectoral goal sets within comprehensive goals. By way of illustration, access to clean water and sanitation could both be covered by a goal on access to essential services. This option has the additional advantage that it demonstrates a clearer value-added of the SDGs as it creates synergies among issues and may better highlight the integrative perspective of sustainable development. To the contrary, the main effect of the first two options would be to elevate sectoral issues in relative isolation.

6. How do we measure progress? Depending on how the SDGs are framed, there may be a need to develop new measurement methodologies/tools and to utilize both quantitative as well as qualitative indicators. With respect to some areas of concern where the capacities of Member States diverge widely, it could be fruitful to explore the adoption of a "pledge and review" process. Countries would stipulate, in line with their needs and capacities, which goals and/or targets they plan to achieve nationally and when. However, while the selection of nationally-determined goals and/or targets may promote buy-in, it has a negative trade-off with respect to the feasibility and accuracy of global monitoring.

As much as possible, the data and information requirements to report on the implementation of specific goals and targets should be defined before their final selection. However, there should be recognition that setting goals can stimulate the development of new or improved data and tools for measurement; therefore, the agenda need not be strictly constrained by what is currently available. Moreover, the SDGs discussion is a prime opportunity to explore critically needed complements to GDP for the evaluation of economic performance. SDG monitoring should be based, as much as possible, on a cascading monitoring system from local to subnational, national, regional and global; use existing robust datasets, including more freely available geospatial data, wherever possible; and establish baselines against which to monitor progress. A range of data sources should be exploited, qualitative as well as quantitative. Population data and projections will need to inform development targets, strategies and policies at all levels.

IV. In Summary

The above proposes some options to stimulate discussion on the critical conceptual issues that could inform the formulation of SDGs, as well as the selection of associated targets and indicators. These critical conceptual issues were distilled from the Rio Outcome Document. Many other questions could be added, e.g., (1) how to ensure convergence with the post-2015 agenda (2) how to engage business and civil society?

As detailed in the Rio Outcome Document, SDGs are only a tool to help the world move towards poverty eradication and long-term sustainability; not every facet of sustainable development can - or should - be covered by the SDGs. Achieving sustainable development requires a transformation of economies and societies, including fundamental changes in production and consumption patterns. An inclusive green economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication can also contribute to this transformation. Sustainable development also requires recognizing and strengthening intangible assets such as people's participation, consciousness and sense of responsibility. In addition, it is essential to recognize the impact that cross-cutting enablers such as gender equality, a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system, as well as access to technology generally, including information and communication technology, play as catalysts to achieve all three dimensions of sustainable development.

In developing the SDGs, it is critical to tackle the challenges of achieving poverty eradication and universal human development, while ensuring humanity does not exceed critical ecological thresholds with attendant risk of economic and social setbacks. The success of the SDGs will be judged by both the legitimacy and accountability of the process - intergovernmental, with meaningful stakeholder input and participation - and the outcomes. In this regard, human rights, equity, inclusive governance, women's empowerment and gender equality, protection of the most vulnerable, peace and social justice are intrinsic to sustainable development, and therefore the SDGs should be consonant with the broader post-2015 development agenda.

Finally, MDGs and SDGs are not competing concepts - the SDGs, correctly formulated, will accelerate and continue the work begun under the banner of the MDGs, achieve greater economic and social inclusion, and also emphasize the integration and balance among economic, social and environmental aspirations. Thus, there should be a unified, people-centred development agenda for the post-2015 period, with sustainable development at its centre.

Issues Brief 2: POVERTY ERADICATION

1

I.

Stocktaking

Globally, the MDG target with regard to extreme poverty is estimated to have been reached - the proportion of people living below $1.25 (PPP) per day in developing regions fell from 47 per cent in 1990 to less than half this value in 2010, five years before the target date2.

While the global target has been reached, there is considerable variation across regions and countries. For example, at the regional level, the proportion of people living below the extreme poverty line fell, over 1990 to 2008, from 56 to 47 in sub-Saharan Africa; from 51 to 34 in Southern Asia, from 60 to 13 in China, from 45 to 17 in South-Eastern Asia, from twelve to six in Latin America and the Caribbean, from five to three in Western Asia and from five to two in North Africa. Likewise, there are differences in this poverty statistic across groups of countries in special situations: reductions from 65 to 47 for least developed countries (LDCs) and from 53 to 32 in land locked developing countries (LLDCs); and stagnation at 30 for small island developing states (SIDS) over the period 1990 to 2008. Significant variations are also observed across and within countries.

Apart from these different rates of progress, certain other characteristics of the world's poor help define the situation as it exists today. First, a disproportionately large number continue to be extremely vulnerable. One indicator of this is that the proportion of people living below the slightly higher $2 per day poverty line3 has changed by a far smaller degree, declining from 65 percent in 1990 to 43 percent in 2008. This signifies that while many may indeed have escaped extreme poverty, such gains could be fragile: large numbers remain perilously close to falling into poverty, should they experience shocks they are unable to cope with. For the poor, a shock of even a relatively short duration can have long term adverse consequences.

Second, extreme poverty tends to be more pronounced in rural areas. Although many developing countries are urbanizing, with the absolute number of the poor increasing rapidly in towns and cities, poverty remains more widespread and more entrenched in the villages. A 2010 estimate found approximately 35 percent of the total rural population in developing countries to be living in extreme poverty. In these areas, the poor tend to be small producers, landless agricultural workers and family farmers - including fisher folk, pastoralists and those dependent on forests. Their rights to land and the other natural resources that underpin their livelihoods is not always secure, and the degrading quality of these resources due to climate change and unsustainable management practices renders their condition increasingly precarious with impacts felt along both income and non-income dimensions. At the same time, their access to services and markets can be well below what is available to urban populations, making their escape from poverty even more challenging. This can be especially marked in LDCs, where around 70 percent of the population continues to be in rural areas.

1 The Technical Support Team is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the United

Nations Development Programme. This note has benefited from contributions and comments by DESA, ESCAP, FAO, IFAD, ILO, OHCHR, OHRLLS, PBSO, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNEP, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNV, UN-WOMEN, WFP, WMO and the World Bank.

2 The absolute number of the poor has also declined significantly, but at a less appreciable rate due to

population growth.

Third, even after taking the rural-urban variation into account, certain population groups are disproportionately represented among the poor, and face additional constraints - such as poorer access to productive resources and markets - in escaping poverty. These include women; persons with disabilities; children; in many cases, indigenous peoples or those from cultural or ethnic subgroups; and those living in geographically remote or conflict-affected areas4. Again, some of these population groups may have livelihoods and well being that are closely intertwined with natural resources and the environment.

Fourth, income alone presents only a partial picture of poverty which is multidimensional, with several inter-linked aspects such as limited or inadequate opportunities and capabilities. These additional dimensions include hunger and food/nutrition insecurity; lack of access to basic, quality services such as health care, education and sanitation; a lack of empowerment and civic participation; lack of personal security and others. Several of these dimensions, especially for the poor, are closely related to the environment - for example health is directly affected by declining environmental quality in ways that the poor may find harder to address individually. These multiple dimensions of poverty - when suitably measured - convey a more complete picture than provided by the income indicator alone, while also helping devise policies to assist in escaping poverty.

The multiple dimensions of poverty help to frame the nature of the challenges to be faced in setting a goal to eradicate extreme poverty. At current rates of progress, it is estimated that there will still be about a billion people in extreme poverty in 2015. If we are seeking to eradicate poverty, then the aspiration is for a world where no one - regardless of physical location, gender, age, health, disability status, ethnic identity etc. - is poor at any time over his/her life cycle; and that this is maintained across generations. Such an aspiration can only be met if multiple deprivations that curtain life opportunities (including structural factors such as discrimination, violence and conflict) can be addressed jointly, in a manner that is sustainable over time and across generations5. For example, measures to eradicate poverty in this sense would need to combine social protection; employment and livelihoods generation; and the proper nourishment and education of children to enable their cognitive development for the future.

This can be done if we bring to bear our collective knowledge on poverty reduction. Since the MDGs were formulated, we have arrived at a much clearer understanding of poverty and what is needed to escape it. First, it is now accepted that robust and stable economic growth - measured in terms of increasing GDP/capita - is necessary to reduce poverty, but not sufficient in and of itself. Not all countries that experience similar periods of rapid growth reduce poverty by similar extents. Growth that creates decent work and livelihood opportunities for the poor is more likely to be accompanied by accelerated poverty reduction. In addition, lower inequality can enhance the impact of growth on poverty, and reduce the chances of conflict. Achieving the sustainable, equitable and inclusive growth that will be necessary to eradicate poverty, while conserving the environment - including as a source of services upon which the poor depend, will require access to modern energy, other technological innovations, sustainable environmental stewardship, as well as forward looking macroeconomic policies.

4 At a global level, a greater number of the extremely poor now live in countries classified as middle income

(MICs) rather than those classified as low income (LICs). However the challenges to - and opportunities for-reducing poverty can be similar across countries, irrespective of which of these two classes they happen to be

Second, policies that foster quality growth need to be complemented by those that can directly accelerate and sustain poverty reduction across all segments of the population. This presupposes strong national ownership of, and political commitment to, a poverty reduction agenda - another necessary condition for success, as demonstrated by the MDGs. These policies and measures could include - but not be limited to - provision of universal access to basic services ensuring quality nutrition, health, and education outcomes; empowering individuals to seize economic opportunities; well-designed social protection schemes that would, progressively, result in a nationally defined social protection floor and help protect against sudden shocks; also developing the capacity better to predict and prepare for such shocks. For countries/populations faced by recurrent natural disasters or other crises, the immediate humanitarian response would need to dovetail into longer term development interventions that build capacity and provide sustainable outcomes. Better managed natural resources can themselves strengthen the resilience of the poor, by both reducing the likelihood of natural hazards and offering resources to cope with them.

Third, these policies would need to address pro-actively the specific constraints faced by distinct population groups, including differentiated approaches for women and girls and those facing marginalization. For example, in rural areas inequitable and insecure access to productive assets, markets and services make it harder for the poor to escape poverty. Lack of opportunities and support for adopting sustainable livelihoods may hasten the degradation of the natural resource base, thus further exacerbating poverty. Proactive measures may also be needed to address different forms of discrimination, for example those related to gender or disability; also to promote full respect for the rights of minorities and indigenous peoples. The lack of access to quality basic services in remote areas - such as modern energy - can limit economic opportunities for both men and women. Women and girls can face demands on their time in order to meet household needs for energy and water - thus further limiting their options for remunerative occupations and civic participation. In fact, expanded opportunities and the empowerment of women and girls, including their access to sexual and reproductive health and rights, can have positive multiplier effects on accelerating the pace of not just poverty eradication, but other goals as well.

Fourth, policies that may accentuate or perpetuate poverty and exclusion, or cause a deterioration in the natural environment, would need to be identified and their impacts ameliorated. These could include, among others, excessively narrow macroeconomic policies; regressive tax systems; poorly designed subsidies whose benefits are captured by the non-poor, representing a loss of resources that could have been better focused on poverty eradication; land management and tenure systems, among others. Many of these policies - such as poorly targeted subsidies - can hasten the deterioration of environmental quality, further hurting the poor.

Fifth, governance challenges that limit the ability to deliver increasingly well-targeted, people sensitive and effective services in an efficient manner have to be resolved. Solutions, depending on the country context, could include the better use of science and technology applications (for example through ICT), administrative decentralization, accountability, strengthened access to justice, and a better use of community organizations. Higher quality, more timely and better disaggregated data are needed for improved policy design, implementation and accountability. In many cases, such solutions would only have longer term impact if they are accompanied by strengthening of institutional capacities.

Poverty eradication requires that the three dimensions of sustainable development - the economic, social and environmental - be brought together in mutually supportive ways. Degrading natural resource stocks, climate change, and unsustainable management of the natural resource base and ecosystems will limit our ability to reduce poverty and ensure inclusion now and for generations in the future, as well as threaten to undo some of the progress already made.

Unsustainable patterns of production and consumption can, through adverse environmental impacts, disproportionately affect the well-being of the poor through multiple channels; and widening disparities and inequalities can themselves threaten the continuity of progress towards improving human development. A broader structural transformation is needed to ensure the enduring well-being of all, and this must happen in the context of a broader sustainable development agenda.

II.

Overview proposals

1. Various proposals have been made for SDGs related to poverty - and are compiled, for example, at:

a) ODI: http://tracker.post2015.org/ b) North-South Institute: http://cidpnsi.ca/blog/portfolio/tracking-post-2015/ c) Stakeholder

Forum: http://www.sustainabledevelopment2015.org/einventory/searchinventory.php d) European Report on Development, 2013:

http://www.erd-report.eu/erd/report_2012/documents/FullReportEN.pdf

Many of these propose the eradication of extreme poverty, with some proposing target dates such as 2025 or 2030. Poverty eradication also features prominently in the ongoing national and thematic consultations being supported by the UN Development Group.

III.

The way forward

While several of the MDGs can arguably be considered as reflecting the multiple dimensions of poverty, the two that constitute MDG 1 - extreme poverty and hunger - are strongly linked. Each of these is associated with well-defined indicators, and targets are defined in terms of desired value of the indicators relative to their starting points. There are no indicators that can be construed as recommending a particular course of action towards achieving the targets for MDG 1 - unlike, for example, the goal on maternal health which includes both a desired target for the maternal mortality ratio (MMR), as well as an indicator on the percentage of births attended by skilled birth attendants - with an increase in the latter expected to lead to an improvement in the MMR.

Although limited in many ways, these indicators and targets for MDG1 retain the virtues of simplicity, objective measurability, easy communicability and - as shown through experience - ease of adaptability to country circumstances. It may be desirable for poverty SDG(s) to retain such characteristics - although in order to achieve eradication, the target(s) would most likely be set in absolute and not relative terms, include non-income dimensions, and encourage disaggregation in order better to understand and address various forms of inequality. However, as the process for developing them moves forward, it might be desirable also to consider:

a. Is the current $1.25 per day poverty line an adequate measure for eradicating income poverty;

b. To what extent - and in what manner - should the multiple dimensions of poverty - including those most closely affected by environmental quality - be reflected as separate/joint parts of a poverty outcome that takes sustainability into account; c. How can goals and targets be best designed to take into account the special circumstances of especially vulnerable countries, or those that are conflict-affected; d. Should some of the means to this end - e.g. social protection, access to modern energy services, skills-based education, full employment and decent work - require separate goals and targets and, if so, what criteria should guide their selection; e. How can goals and targets be designed in meaningful ways for marginalized or excluded groups;

f. What is needed to make goals for economic growth and poverty eradication consistent with those intended to achieve a more sustainable use of natural resources and improve the quality of the environment, and; g. How should goals for sustainable management of the natural resource base and ecosystems be translated into national action?

While an indicator of income poverty may well be retained as part of SDG(s) related to poverty eradication, the multiple dimensions of poverty suggest that there will also be others that are closely related to achieving the poverty outcome. Although there are proposals for a single overarching metric to measure multidimensional poverty6, previous experience with composite indices related to the MDGs suggests that individual indicators tend to be preferred for ease of interpretation. It may be possible, however, to supplement the tracking of different sets of poverty indicators with an overall composite index, or through other indicators that track changes in well being at a composite level.

One way of including these multiple dimensions could be to reflect the manifestations of poverty in all relevant SDGs, with appropriate targets and indicators, while accommodating environmental sustainability objectives. For example a goal for sustainably improving the nutritional status for all could have several different targets and indicators, including ones that seek to ensure calorie adequacy for productive work and adequate nutrition for cognitive development.

Some of the direct manifestations and structural factors that contribute to eradicating poverty can be are addressed within the existing set of MDGs - basic education, gender equality, mortality reduction and health improvements - while others are being discussed in relation to the post-2015 agenda, notably employment, energy and inequalities. However, even when picked up as an issue in the current set of MDGs, there may be scope for further refining targets and indicators to emphasize the relationship to poverty eradication and environmental sustainability - for example there could be targets and indicators related to the economic empowerment of women within the context of a goal on gender equality; or for ensuring the access of vulnerable populations to ecosystem services in the context of goals for sustainable management of those ecosystems. However, it may be more difficult - but not impossible - to design separate poverty related indicators covering sustainable management of the global commons, even though there is a clear link to poverty eradication.

The 'poverty-focused' goals could accordingly sit alongside others that address (i) poverty-environment nexus issues such as those relevant for water, health, food security, energy, resilience, and (ii) integrated and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems.

In sum, the long term success of a set of Sustainable Development Goals would hinge on the extent to which they address the multiple dimensions of human poverty, including through sustainable and inclusive growth, and the environment dimension of sustainable development. The relationships are complex, but sufficiently well understood to indicate a way forward that will bring together the imperatives of eradicating poverty, reducing inequality, strengthening resilience, improving the efficiency of natural resource use, improving the quality of environmental assets, and ensuring the sustainability of gains across generations.

Issues Brief 3: FOOD SECURITY AND NUTRITION

1

I. Stocktaking

Food security and nutrition are essential dimensions of sustainable development. Inadequate food security and nutrition take an enormous toll on economies and have negative consequences for the livelihoods and economic capabilities of vulnerable populations. A world where all enjoy freedom from want, and progressively realize their right to adequate food and nutrition can only be realized through far reaching transformations, supported by policies and programmes promoting sustainable development in all its three dimensions. Strong interdependencies exist between food security and nutrition and many other parts of a broad sustainable development agenda - inclusive economic growth, population dynamics, decent employment, social protection, energy, water, health, sanitation, natural resource management and protecting ecosystems. The empowerment of women, and addressing inequalities - notably gender inequity and rural-urban inequalities - are as critical to food security and nutrition as they are to a universal sustainable development. The empowerment of families, especially women who are the main child care providers and are responsible for the food preparation and infant and young child feeding, is also critical for these goals.

Hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition can be ended sustainably within a generation2. However, the challenge is immense: one in eight people in the world today (868 million) are undernourished and approximately two billion suffer from micronutrient deficiencies. Significant progress has been made to reduce rates of undernourishment, child stunting, underweight, micronutrient deficiencies, and child mortality. But such progress has been uneven and subject to setbacks caused by food price increases, conflict, and other shocks. New challenges have also emerged, such as increasing incidence of overweight in many countries.

The broader environment that encompasses food systems, and their production and consumption components, has changed considerably in recent years. More or new forms of investment are flowing into the food and agricultural sectors, although needs far exceed investment levels. New patterns of governance of food systems are emerging. The environment for food production is increasingly challenging - particularly for smallholders - due to environmental and climate-related constraints, degradation of ecosystems, globalization, and market integration. This new landscape has profound implications across national boundaries, underlining the need for holistic, innovative, and collaborative solutions, policies, and strategies. There is need for a universal agenda, but also for country and context-specific strategies. People-centred approaches are needed, underpinned by principles of human rights, inclusion, national ownership, and accountability.

Despite progress, the global community must address significant challenges to meet the needs of the estimated 868 million undernourished today. In comparison with the global situation several decades ago, a significantly lower percentage of children under the age of five today are stunted (low height-for-age), underweight (low weight-for-age), or wasted (low weight-for-height). However, major regional disparities exist: in sub-Saharan Africa 36% of children under the age of five are

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. Preparation of the brief has been co-led by WFP, FAO and IFAD, with contributions from ESCAP, ILO, UNEP, UNICEF, UNV, and UN-Women.

2 For a global vision and building blocks towards ending hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition, readers may

refer to documentation stemming from the "High Level Consultation on Hunger, Food Security and Nutrition in the Post-2015 Development Framework" (Madrid, 4 April 2013) available at: http://www.worldwewant2015.org/food2015 stunted, in Asia the corresponding figure is 27%3. Moreover, other forms of malnutrition-specifically overweight and obesity - are rapidly rising. Globally, more than 1.4 billion adults are overweight.4 The increasing prevalence of overweight and the closely related increases in non-communicable disease is at least partly a consequence of changing diets and lifestyles. In many contexts, however, the incidence of overweight is also closely related to poverty. Current trends in the prevalence of overweight may continue as part of societal transformations associated with economic growth and urbanization. This puts additional pressure on public health systems and on agriculture. The agricultural sector is also under pressure from environmental and climatic factors and from population growth. Global demand for food as well as non-food agricultural products (e.g. biofuels) is increasing, and more resource-intensive (e.g. animal protein) foods represent a greater part of this demand. Meanwhile, a large percentage of food currently produced is lost or wasted. More sustainable production and consumption models are needed.

While current and future challenges differ from the past, responses to new challenges can and should build on lessons learned from national experiences.

MDG1 recognizes the close link between income poverty and food access, which is important to retain at a time when food insecurity and under-nutrition are primarily problems of access. Poor nutritional outcomes are also related to inadequate health, poor sanitation, and many other factors. Global experience in the pursuit of MDG1 shows, however, that progress in reducing extreme income poverty does not necessarily result in a proportionate reduction of caloric intake deficiencies. Although recent data indicates that the world has succeeded in achieving the poverty target of MDG1, progress in reducing food insecurity and malnutrition has been less robust. Measures of food insecurity, particularly those that address undernourishment, do not adequately capture and reflect aspects related to micronutrient deficiencies, nor do they adequately distinguish between chronic food insecurity and shorter periods of acute deprivation or vulnerability.

One major lesson is that strategies for addressing poverty need to be "nutrition sensitive" to ensure commensurate impacts on malnutrition. This has implications in terms of the policy and investment choices made by countries for driving development and growth, as well as for models of sustainable growth, production, and consumption. "Nutrition sensitive" growth is growth that involves and reaches people living in poverty, especially through increased employment and other income earning opportunities. It also generates resources that poor households and public institutions actually use to improve nutritional status. Appropriate incentives and services are needed to improve diets and access to health care. Agriculture-led growth is generally most effective in reducing food insecurity and malnutrition, especially when supplemented by social protection and nutrition-specific interventions, such as micronutrient supplementation and support to breast feeding. However, agriculture-led growth can only lead to sustainable improvements in food security if it is rooted in more productive, sustainable, resilient, and inclusive agriculture systems.

A second lesson is that progress in raising average calorie intake and improving nutritional status is sensitive to price shocks, such as those affecting global food markets over the past six years. Price volatility is generally expected to become more common in the future. Higher food prices have slowed or even reversed progress in reducing food insecurity for several countries. There is a greater need to incorporate resilience into local food systems, livelihoods and growth strategies.

A third lesson is that even a short period of inadequate nutrition before the age of two (first 1000 days) has important long-term consequences due to its largely irreversible effects on an individual's

3 UNICEF-WHO-The World Bank: Joint child malnutrition estimates - Levels and trends. 2011 estimates.

http://www.who.int/nutgrowthdb/estimates/en/index.html 4 WHO. 2012. Obesity and overweight. Factsheet No. 311. Geneva, Switzerland physical and mental development. Such consequences impact not only the individual and the household, but also the longer-term growth prospects of societies.

Similar to extreme income poverty, food insecurity continues to be predominantly concentrated in rural areas of developing countries, and disproportionately affects poor farmers, agricultural workers, pastoralists, and rural communities. Promoting food security requires particular attention to the rural sector with a dual focus on smallholder agriculture and the non-farm economy. A key underlying cause of recent global food price shocks is, for instance, concentration of production of the main traded cereals in a few geographic areas, coupled with growing environmental and climatic challenges, thin international markets, and high transaction costs. Investing in rural sectors, improving rural-urban linkages, and promoting market development can mitigate food price shocks and their impact on food security. Resilient and sustainable systems require responsible and inclusive investment. This is an important dimension of food security and nutrition that did not quite emerge in the MDGs because of the lack of linkages between MDG1 and MDG7.

Implementation of MDG1 has, in general, not adequately addressed malnutrition (including under-and over-nutrition) in its many dimensions. This is partly because MDG1 had a limited focus in terms of indicators of under-nutrition, and partly because it did not encourage a specific focus on determinants of food security, such as gender equality and women's empowerment, social inclusion and equal access to opportunities and resources. Nor did MDG1 encourage specific attention to unequal nutritional outcomes among different population groups. Different countries have undertaken different strategies to achieve MDG1, which provide a variety of lessons for the SDGs. In particular, the evidence points to a need for:

 Strategies to promote inclusive growth, particularly in the rural sector and with a focus on smallholder systems. There is a long history of success in reducing food insecurity and malnutrition in countries that have invested in agriculture-led, inclusive growth through a combination of agricultural research, adoption of improved technologies, knowledge, extension and information services for small producers. Other important elements include rural education, secure and equitable access to land, water, productive resources and financial capital, infrastructure development (e.g. irrigation, roads, warehouses), and a stable market environment. The experience of several countries in East and South East Asia during and after the Green Revolution is a notable example of a comprehensive agriculture-focused strategy of growth that resulted in simultaneously reducing poverty and food insecurity at scale, although with significant environmental externalities. The impact pathways of this approach were at least threefold- vastly increased food production (primarily by smallholder farmers) and cheaper food for urban consumers; higher profits for farmers; and higher wages for agricultural labourers. Similar impact was achieved in countries as diverse as India, China, and Bangladesh from creating a more enabling environment for private investors on farm or in ancillary sectors.

 Strategies integrating social protection with food interventions. Social protection is an important element of many national strategies to reduce malnutrition. This includes specific programs designed to address the nutritional needs of women of childbearing age, pregnant and lactating mothers. There is a need for a greater emphasis on childhood nutrition during the first 1000 days of a child's life, from conception to two years of age, when under-nutrition is most likely to have long-lasting negative consequences. Additionally, social protection measures, including social protection "floor" initiatives, are increasingly seen as integral to strategies to promote growth and investment. Integrated social protection programs with explicit food security and nutrition objectives have been promoted in countries like Brazil, Mexico, Colombia, Ethiopia, Kenya, and others; although the determinants of impacts on nutrition are not always clear. Conditional cash transfers have demonstrated that positive impacts on nutrition require a multi-dimensional approach. Examples include programmes that promote health care, education, and women's empowerment. Unconditional cash transfers have also been found to have positive impacts on reducing stunting in some countries (e.g. Ecuador, South Africa). Research shows that safety net programs need to combine different approaches (e.g. cash plus food) to respond to different circumstances (e.g. local food supply capacity).

 Strategies promoting human capital development and inclusion, with particular focus on gender. Much of the literature on nutrition suggests that determinants vary depending on context and population group. One very common finding across contexts is that progress in women's empowerment and gender equality is strongly correlated with improved nutrition. There are multiple facets and causal linkages related to income generation, food production, processing, and preparation, childbearing, caretaking and mothering roles. Investment in women's education - particularly beyond the primary level - and in women's health (including reproductive health and rights), as well as the removal of discriminatory laws and policies to ensure women's equal access and rights to resources, services and social protection, are all important factors for improved nutrition. Reductions in food insecurity and malnutrition have also been associated with comprehensive policies on education and gender equality in a number of countries. Investment in health and nutrition education programmes in schools and in informal and non-formal settings has also shown positive impact.

 Integrated policy and programme interventions focused on food security and nutrition. Numerous countries today have integrated food security and nutrition plans. One example is the Ethiopia National Nutrition Programme, which includes a number of interventions that address both immediate and underlying causes of malnutrition at the community level through free health services, micronutrient supplementation, and social protection initiatives based on cash or food for work. The program has led to measurable improvements in nutrition outcomes (e.g. child stunting). Several other countries have large nutritional programs involving school feeding, food preparation and nutritional awareness, promotion of breastfeeding, improved weaning practices, and bio-fortification. Diverse and integrated approaches often involve agriculture, employment generation, social protection, education, healthcare, and sanitation. Nepal, Peru, Rwanda, and other countries have implemented multi-sector community level interventions within broader national frameworks. These countries have included specific efforts to reach out to marginalized areas and population groups, including indigenous peoples, and to promote diversity of local food availability. A broader approach has been undertaken in a number of countries adopting "zero hunger" strategies. In some cases, these have involved a complex set of institutional and policy initiatives linking macroeconomic policy to social protection, market development, minimum wage increases, investment in human capital, citizenship involvement and community employment generation. In Brazil's Fome Zero program, a transformation of food markets to ensure the empowerment and integration of small family farmers has also been an important factor.

 Addressing food insecurity in crisis situations. One key lesson from a country-disaggregated review of trends in food security and nutrition is the importance of insecurity, conflict, climate variability, and vulnerability to shocks and crises. A far-reaching exercise to identify challenges to promoting food security and improved nutrition in "protracted crises" has been underway under the auspices of the Committee on World Food Security since 2011. Causes of protracted crisis situations are diverse, but common conditions include frequent or continued exposure to shocks that undermine livelihoods, food and market systems. Weak institutional and governance capacity as well as unsustainable or inequitable use of natural resources are also a common feature of protracted crises. Emergency interventions in these contexts are often not well integrated with development approaches to address structural issues and promote resilience. Future advances in practice and research are needed better to promote resilience and integrate peace-building into food security interventions in these contexts.

IV.

Overview of proposals

Existing goals can be drawn both from the MDGs and agreed outcomes of United Nations conferences and Plans of Action, including the 1996 World Food Summit and follow-up meetings. More recently, food security targets have been identified for instance in the Istanbul Plan of Action, with a commitment to undertake policies and measures to "make substantial progress towards eradicating hunger by 2020", "substantially increase investment in rural infrastructure", and "ensure access to safe food and emergency food assistance in all least developed countries." Specific actions are laid out as "means of implementation" towards these targets. Concerning nutrition, in 2012 the World Health Assembly agreed to six global targets, namely: 40% reduction in the number of stunted children under the age of 5 by 2025, 50% reduction of anaemia in women of childbearing age by 2025, 30% reduction of low birth weight by 2025, no increase in child overweight by 2025, increase exclusive breastfeeding rates in the first six months up to at least 50% by 2025, reducing and maintaining childhood wasting to less than 5%.

Under the MDG framework, measures of food insecurity and malnutrition are closely tied to MDG 1 as Target C, reflecting the close link between food insecurity and income poverty (indeed, extreme poverty was originally defined in relation to income levels required to access a minimum daily caloric intake). This is underpinned in MDG1 by two indicators: Prevalence of Undernourishment (POU) and the proportion of children under five who are underweight. The first refers to a method of estimating, on the basis of limited data, the number of undernourished people in a population, and the second focuses attention on the lasting effects of malnutrition.

Published sources identify numerous potential adjustments to MDG1 targets and indicators. The first recommendation is to revise and strengthen the nutritional dimension to move beyond an exclusive emphasis on dietary caloric (energy) intake, incorporating other vital nutritional elements. In particular, overcoming the dual challenges of under- and imbalanced nutrition (e.g. due to excess food energy consumption) requires a diversified diet made up of safe, sufficient and nutritious food over the lifecycle, especially for women of reproductive age and children. Access to safe drinking water, hygiene and sanitation, and nutrition education are also key. Some experts have suggested that the underweight indicator currently used should be supplanted by the indicator of reduction of stunting in children below the age of 2, to give greater emphasis on chronic malnutrition. Others have advocated for an indicator on women's nutrition, to underline the importance of gender equality for achieving broader progress on nutrition. Experts have suggested that definitions, measurements, and thresholds of undernourishment need to change; currently they are associated with the minimum caloric energy needed for a sedentary lifestyle, whereas some are suggesting they ought to be adjusted to reflect a level or threshold associated with an active lifestyle. There are also suggestions that food security and nutrition need to be more closely linked to access to safe and clean water. For example, a new food security and nutrition goal could help to enhance the recognition of linkages with water, health, education, and sanitation. Other suggested changes emphasize greater recognition of interdependence between environmental sustainability and the resilience of food security and nutrition systems.

Underlying some current proposals is the aspiration to establish alternative patterns of food production and consumption rooted in the three dimensions of sustainability, with ambitious targets for reducing post-harvest losses or waste as well as alternative mechanisms of agricultural, nutritional and food systems governance, of universal though differentiated relevance. Such a transformative approach also gained great support at a High Level Event on the UNDG Global

Thematic Consultation on Hunger, Food Security and Nutrition held in Madrid on 4 April5. One example of a holistic, transformative agenda is represented by the UN Secretary General's Zero Hunger Challenge, which is based on five pillars: (1) 100% access to adequate food all year round, (2) zero stunted children under two years of age, (3) all food systems are sustainable, (4) 100% increase in smallholder productivity and income, and (5) zero loss or waste of food. The Zero Hunger Challenge further specifies that eliminating hunger involves investments in agriculture, rural development, decent work, social protection and equality of opportunity.

In parallel with proposals on goals related to food security and nutrition, some stakeholders have put on the table proposals on principles and modalities of production and access to food. Elements of such proposals include concepts of right to food, nutrition security, and sustainable food systems. Proposals have also addressed the importance of improving governance mechanisms to ensure food security and nutrition for all. Areas that have elicited particular attention concerning governance include: improving the international institutional and policy environment affecting food prices, trade, food safety, and investment in agriculture and in rural sectors (downstream and upstream food supply chains).

III. The way forward

A common vision with universal relevance. A key precondition for tackling food security and nutrition issues in a global agenda for sustainable development is a shared vision that recognizes the centrality of these issues to the agenda, bridging the human development focus of the MDGs with the holistic, global, sustainability-oriented approach of the SDGs. This vision should be centred on the imperative of guaranteeing - for all human beings - their fundamental right to safe, sufficient, nutritious and affordable food, and a life free from hunger and malnutrition.

Recognizing the multiple dimensions of food security and nutrition. Ensuring global progress towards food security and nutrition requires action along multiple dimensions. These include food availability, access, stability, consumption and utilization (as per the FAO definition of "food security"), and health and sanitation. Acting on these dimensions in a comprehensive manner is essential to ensure that linkages between food security and nutrition and different parts of the SDG agenda are addressed. Such multi-dimensionality and linkages may be captured through i) the formulation of a goal, ii) identification of food security and nutrition-sensitive targets under different goals, iii) identification of nutrition-sensitive indicators related to different targets, and/or iv) the promotion of nutrition-sensitive approaches and strategies to implement the SDG agenda. Multidimensionality and complexity suggest the need to capture both food security and nutrition outcomes and their enablers (e.g. linkages to sustainable agriculture, infrastructure, education, water, health, decent jobs, social protection, the empowerment of women, and gender equality). It also signals the need to promote a holistic notion of food systems, including all food-related activities (producing, storing, processing, packaging, trading and consuming food) and acknowledging the challenges confronting different food systems in the current global environment.

Appropriate governance mechanisms and partnerships. This comprehensive vision needs to be delivered through transparent governance mechanisms and processes. At global level, efforts should be made to build on and enforce existing negotiated frameworks and fora, with the CFS as the foremost inclusive multi-stakeholder platform for food security and nutrition. Both globally and at country levels, a key aspect of the needed governance environment is new institutional space for multi-stakeholder strategies and governance, and the promotion of principled partnerships with

5

http://www.fao.org/fsnforum/post2015/sites/post2015/files/files/Synthesis%20document%204th%20April.pd f shared responsibility and mutual accountability among different actors and sectors. Key actors whose involvement is essential to "govern" a new food security and nutrition agenda under the SDGs include, besides governments, smallholders (women and men alike) and their organizations, other private investors, consumers and their organizations, civil society, the scientific community, and UN and other development partners. Partnerships should be explicitly designed to address inequalities and their interplay with food insecurity and malnutrition, and be people-centred and supported by rights-based approaches.

Key questions to be addressed by an SDG agenda on food security and nutrition:

1) How to make growth both poverty-reducing and nutrition-sensitive. As noted, the quality of economic growth is crucial to determine whether it will have positive nutrition implications. The impact of growth on income poverty does not automatically translate into impact on nutritional outcomes. As the SDG agenda tackles issues of inclusive, job rich and sustainable growth, food security and nutrition considerations should be woven into discussions. For example, this may include unlocking the potential of rural areas to sustain nutrition-sensitive growth, and the role of social protection in simultaneously promoting inclusive growth and better nutrition outcomes. Attention is also warranted on how to design and prioritize investments in energy, water, and infrastructure to enable multiple positive impacts on growth, food security and nutrition as well as on gender equality.

2) How to promote the transformation towards sustainable, inclusive and resilient food systems at all levels. As food security and nutrition are affected by what food is produced in different contexts, how it is produced, processed, transported, marketed, and consumed, achieving them in a sustainable manner requires a transformation of whole food systems. In the context of OWG discussions, this may have implications for discussions on technology development and innovation, access and rights over natural resources, addressing discriminatory laws, policies and practices; energy, water, infrastructure, human capabilities and skills, gender equality, and sustainable consumption and diets. How to reduce the carbon footprint of sectors related to food systems is an important dimension of this discussion. Other important elements of the discussion should include how to enhance and harness ecosystem services for food security.

3) How to promote nutrition as a specific dimension of human development. Given the centrality of adequate nutrition to human development, addressing nutrition-sensitive outcomes and enablers can involve discussion on education and health in particular. A clear focus is needed on promoting gender equality in all aspects of social and economic life, as well as on building the human capital of women and young girls and strengthening their rights, as an important precondition for improved nutrition at all levels.

4) How to address specific needs, vulnerabilities and contexts (e.g. crisis and post-conflict situations). As noted, food insecurity and malnutrition may be chronic or result from the impacts of specific shocks on vulnerable groups. The new agenda needs to tackle specific vulnerabilities, the inequalities underlying them, and different risk environments. Special consideration needs to be given to populations living in conflict and insecurity, those living below or just above the poverty line, and those living in areas prone to environmental shocks. It is critical to address the specific needs and vulnerabilities of children during the first 1000 days from conception to two years of age. The elderly are also vulnerable, especially in conflict or crisis environments.

5) Attention also needs to go to disparities between different areas in a given country in terms of food supply and access, as well as to challenges of distribution of food across areas and countries.

While maintaining a holistic vision of the challenges at hand, and mindful of the need to address the five issues mentioned above, the design of goals, targets, and indicators may take different forms including the following:

a) A goal on poverty, food security and nutrition. This would build on the current approach of MDG1, recognizing linkages between food security, nutrition and extreme poverty, as well as the centrality of food security and nutrition as drivers of poverty eradication. It would recognize that eradicating extreme poverty and ending extreme food insecurity and malnutrition have been achieved in many countries through increased agricultural productivity and incomes. It may be accompanied by an improved indicator or set of indicators to capture, among other, chronic deprivation, such as child stunting and women's nutritional status.

b) A goal on food security and nutrition. Under this goal, separate targets on food security in its four dimensions may be accompanied by targets in the specific area of nutrition, building on agreed upon targets in this area such as those recently agreed by the World Health Assembly. An alternative would be to combine targets related to nutrition and food security outcomes with targets related to enablers of food security and nutrition (e.g. in the area of sustainable agriculture or gender equality in access to land or other productive resources, services, infrastructure, and social protection). The arguments in favour of this option are that it would increase the salience of food security, nutrition, water and related goals. This would encourage the world community to recognize the need for greater public and private investment in agriculture, nutrition, and food systems to meet new challenges and growing demand, and to address key governance issues that, among others, contributed to food price spikes of the past few years.

c) A combination of a) and/or b) alongside integration of targets and indicators of specific relevance to food security in its four dimensions and to adequate nutrition as a specific outcome under relevant goals, in line with the holistic vision sketched above. This would include nutrition (and gender) sensitive indicators. Indicators on the four dimensions of food security under relevant goals - notably in the areas of sustainable agriculture, management and access to natural resources and ecosystems, social protection, health, education, decent jobs, and gender equality -- would also be needed.

Issues Brief 4: SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE

1

I.

Stocktaking

While significant progress has been made towards achieving the MDGs, critical environmental, social, economic and institutional challenges are still to be overcome. Two crucial connected challenges are: i) the persistently high levels of hunger and malnutrition (870 million people in 2010-2012 [FAO, 2012a]) and- particularly in the rural areas of many developing countries - only slowly declining rates of poverty; and ii) an unsustainable and increasing burden of human activities on the earth's carrying capacity. Greenhouse gas emissions (GHG), biodiversity loss, nitrogen and phosphorus overuse and ocean acidification have reached alarming levels. These, coupled with the decreasing availability of fresh water and increased land degradation and deforestation, as well as inadequate policies to respond to these issues, are undermining the livelihoods of ever growing numbers of people, especially those who live in extreme poverty.

These challenges are further exacerbated by the continuous growth of the world population. It has already surpassed the 7 billion mark and will grow to over 9 billion by the middle of this century. To meet the food demand of 9 billion people will require an increase in agricultural output of about 60 per cent (Alexandratos and Bruinsma, 2012) or a decline in food loss and waste. Increased food production will be a huge challenge, which will place ever-greater pressures on all natural resources, including scarce agricultural land, forests, water and the climate. Indeed, a number of influential studies have suggested that agriculture may not be able to produce the required food needed in order to sustain the growing world population with a healthy and active life (e.g. Foresight, 2011; HLPE, 2011; FAO, 2012b).

At the same time, agriculture broadly understood - including crop and livestock production, fisheries, and forestry - provides income, jobs, food, and other goods and services, to the majority of people now living in poverty. As a result, across countries overall GDP growth originating in agriculture is, on average, at least twice as effective in reducing poverty as growth generated in nonagricultural sectors, five times more effective than other sectors in resource-poor low-income countries (excluding sub-Saharan Africa), and 11 times more effective than other sectors in sub-Saharan Africa (FAO, 2012a). So going forward, agriculture needs not only to provide adequate nutritious food, income, and decent jobs, but also address a host of environmental challenges. To respond to these multiple challenges, there is need to shift to more sustainable forms of agriculture and to introduce comprehensive policies that support this shift.

The Green Revolution, based principally on a package of improved seeds, chemical inputs and irrigation, and supported by measures to strengthen agricultural policies and institutions, resulted in major increases in productivity and production of staple crops in a number of countries, especially in Asia. Arguably, the intensification of food production under the Green Revolution also did much to preserve fragile, marginal, and forest lands that would otherwise have been cultivated for food crops more extensively (Stevenson et al, 2011). Real per capita incomes almost doubled in Asia between 1970 and 1995, and poverty declined from nearly three out of every five Asians in 1975 to less than one in three by 1995. Much of this decline is attributable to agricultural growth - particularly in smallholder farming systems, with accompanying declines in food prices and rising rural incomes. At the same time, it has been associated with high levels of energy use; and in many areas over-use of

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. The preparation of this issues brief has been co-led by FAO and IFAD, with contributions from UNWOMEN, WMO, UN ESCWA, WB, UNIDO, WTO Secretariat, UNOOSA, UNCCD/CBD, UNDP, UNESCO, OHCHR, UNFPA, ESCAP.

agro-chemicals and reliance on intensive mono-cropping has resulted in environmental degradation, including unsustainable use of water and high levels of fertilizer run-off, pesticide impacts, loss of agro-biodiversity, soil contamination and land degradation. Thus agricultural intensification has been at the same time both a saviour and a threat, illustrating the importance of mainstreaming sustainability into a new intensification agenda.

Overall, over the past half-century, intensive agriculture has increased global food production and enabled higher average per capita food consumption in many parts of the world - even if in recent years rates of productivity growth have declined. At the same time, in other parts of the world agriculture has continued to perform below its potential due to low levels of use of external inputs. This is true in many parts of Africa in particular where, with some important exceptions, agricultural productivity has shown only little or no growth. Low rates of agricultural growth combined with high rates of population growth mean that many African countries have gone from being net food exporters to become net food importers.

Agriculture is, by its very nature, a major user of natural resources, although in different ways and to different extents depending on farming system. Thus livestock is the world's largest user of land resources, using almost 80 per cent of all agricultural land; while globally, some 70 per cent of the water used is consumed by the agriculture sector (Kabat, 2013). Of greater concern is the fact that some agricultural systems are drivers of environmental degradation and loss of biodiversity (FAO, 2009; IAASTD, 2009, UNEP, 2010). Over 60 per cent of the world's major ecosystem goods and services are being degraded or used unsustainably (MEA, 2005), while the genetic diversity of crops, breeds, trees and aquatic resources on which agriculture depends is at severe risk: this owing to global environmental change as well as the loss of knowledge associated with agricultural practices based on local varieties. Today, three crops only - wheat, maize and rice - supply more than half of humanity's calories. In addition, agriculture and land-use change (mostly bringing forest land under cultivation) is a major source of greenhouse gases, producing between a quarter and a third of all emissions; and more than any other sector, agriculture is already adversely affected by unpredictable and extreme effects of climate change. In the future, higher average temperatures are expected to reduce yield levels, particularly in the developing world; while increasingly unreliable weather conditions will likely undermine productivity growth everywhere.

At the same time, roughly one-third of food produced - 1.3 billion tonnes per year - is lost or wasted globally (FAO, 2011b). Food is lost or wasted throughout the supply chain, from initial agricultural production down to final consumption. In medium- and high-income countries there are high levels of food waste at the consumption stage. In low-income countries, by contrast, food is lost mostly on-farm - due to pests or lack of effective storage - or in transportation and processing. While increasing food production is vital to meet the future increase in final demand, food availability can also be increased and the environmental costs of agriculture production reduced by reducing the amounts of food lost and wasted.

The challenges facing agriculture - crop, livestock, fisheries and forestry - over the coming decades are complex. To meet the growing demand for food, feed, fuel and fibre, agricultural systems need to become more productive and less wasteful. They need to provide decent incomes for farmers, including the landless and waged agricultural workers, and create employment in the rural areas that respects labour standards. They must be more efficient and more sustainable, in terms of their use of, and effects on, the natural resource base. They need to be more resilient to shocks and changes, better able to withstand increased climatic shocks and rising temperatures. They have to reduce their levels of GHG emissions. They also have to provide other important ecosystem services, such as water provision, pollination, flood and disease control and maintenance of soil fertility. They need to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels: sustainable agriculture necessarily relies on clean, green, renewable energy and increased energy efficiency. And finally, less produce must be wasted or lost post-harvest. All of these challenges require that food and agricultural systems are made more sustainable, not only from an economic perspective but also from environmental, social and institutional perspectives and at various scales, from the local to the global level.

This requires a consistent focus on production systems that draw more effectively on production ecology principles to improve their productivity and efficiency while reducing their negative environmental and social impacts. Sustainable agricultural systems are likely to be associated with a more targeted use of external inputs, a more integrated approach to managing natural resources, and more analysis at the landscape/eco-system level together with better management of ecosystem services. They are based on ecosystem approaches that conserve, manage and enhance natural resources and take advantage of the natural biological inputs and processes such as soil organic matter, natural predators of pests and pollination. These systems can reduce the negative impacts of agriculture on the environment and enrich the natural capital and the flow of ecosystem services, thereby contributing to increasing resilience of not only production systems but also of social organization.

Increased levels of investment in agricultural research are essential to develop appropriate technologies and practices. Biodiversity will even be more important in future, providing crop varieties and breeding stock that enable farmers, pastoralists and fisher folk to adapt to changing production and environmental and climatic conditions; and enhanced investment in conserving, using and developing genetic resources for food and agriculture and the ecosystem services they provide, will be crucial.

An associated set of requirements are consistent policies and prices that provide incentives to farmers and agribusinesses to adopt sustainable technologies and practices, and to discontinue unsustainable ones. So too are stronger institutional capacities to promote and implement such policies, and effective accountability mechanisms to monitor outcomes. Financial support to facilitate the transition towards sustainable practices may also be important in many contexts. Sustainable agricultural practices based on agro-ecological intensification are likely to be highly context-specific, and this requires recognition of relevant local and indigenous knowledge systems and practices in the development of technological solutions. Improved access and more secure rights to land and other productive resources for poor rural populations, as well as tenure arrangements that offer incentives for investment in the land, are preconditions for a move towards more sustainable practices. So too is capacity development for small-scale farmers - women and men alike - to enable them to increase their productivity, sustainability, and resilience.

A key observation of the 2009 International Assessment on Agricultural Science and Technology for Development (IAASTD) is that "agriculture operates within complex social, economic and environmental systems and so should be seen as multifunctional in its nature". Agriculture's multiple roles - which encompass not only food production systems but also issues such as social organization, issues related to access to land, resources and local markets, the continuum between rural and peri-urban environments, cultural identities and local and indigenous knowledge and sustainable tourism - call for an integrated approach to agriculture and food security. It also points to the need to involve multiple stakeholders in the process of 'rethinking' and re-designing our current approach to agriculture and food production. Multistakeholder dialogues must be promoted, involving food producing companies, representatives of civil society, representative of consortia for agricultural research, UN organizations, Governments and private companies involved in potentially controversial issues such as the use of genetically-modified organisms in food production, agricultural trade, and, more recently, biofuels.

Worldwide, there are already numerous examples of sustainable agriculture practices/approaches that have been taken to scale: e.g. crop rotation, conservation tillage, systems of rice intensification, integrated pest management, agro-forestry, integrated plant nutrient management, integrated crop and fish/livestock systems, soil and water conservation measures. Equally there are many examples of policies that promote sustainable agriculture, or that work contrary to sustainable agriculture.

It is therefore time to rethink the roles of agriculture, forestry and fisheries in a sustainable development agenda. Though many may disagree on specific agricultural development strategies or technology solutions, a consensus seems to be emerging on objectives. Moving forward could build on existing commitments, including those contained in the outcome document from Rio+20 ("The future we want"), which: "reaffirm[s] the necessity to promote, enhance and support more sustainable agriculture that improves food security, eradicates hunger and is economically viable, while conserving land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, biodiversity and ecosystems and enhancing resilience to climate change and natural disasters" (para.111). Indeed, much guidance was presented already in "Agenda 21", the outcome of the Rio Earth Summit of 1992, in which nations acknowledged: "Major adjustments are needed in agricultural, environmental and macroeconomic policy, at both national and international levels, in developed as well as developing countries, to create the conditions for sustainable agriculture and rural development (SARD). The major objective of SARD is to increase food production in a sustainable way and enhance food security." That this statement is still true 21 years later indicates the scale of the challenge. But it is a challenge that we cannot afford to postpone any further.

II.

Overview of proposals

To address the challenges just presented, a number of attempts have been made by various actors to define objectives or priority areas for action. These broadly include the following:

x Increase agricultural productivity, close yield gaps, achieve maximum sustainable yield in farms and fisheries, and improve efficiency of resource use - e.g. more crop per kg of nutrients, more crop per drop of water, more crop per unit of energy, higher productivity per unit labour

x Increase incomes for agricultural households and decent rural employment opportunities

x Nurture healthy, sustainable and productive ecosystems and support integrated evidence-based planning and management of land and natural resources to reduce deforestation, land degradation, biodiversity loss, and the carbon footprint of agriculture and food systems

x Increase supply, nutritional value and safety, availability and distribution of food through support to diversified, gender and nutrition-sensitive, human rights-based, sustainable food systems

x Increase value addition of primary commodities and develop inclusive agri-food value chains, which reduce post-harvest losses and waste and ensure that agricultural commodity prices reflect social and environmental costs

x Make food production systems more resilient to shocks and changes, Promote food security concerns in trade regimes and trade policies, and Revisit agricultural policies to promote local and regional agricultural markets

x Recognize indigenous and local knowledge in the design and implementation of national and regional agricultural policies.

A comprehensive sustainable agriculture agenda will encompass all these areas, and its implementation will require incentives and other measures to achieve change in the behaviour of all the actors involved in the agriculture and food sector. Such measures may aim to:

x Facilitate participation of a wide range of stakeholders in an inclusive manner in identifying and designing measures to achieve more sustainable agriculture and food systems x Promote secure, equitable, and long-term land tenure arrangements, particularly for women, to create incentives for (and de-risk) responsible agricultural investment

x Improve mechanisms and incentives for technology sharing

x Strengthen provision of public goods in support of sustainable agriculture

x Strengthen sustainability considerations and incentives in public planning, especially for hard (physical), natural (ecosystem) and soft (policy, regulation) infrastructure investments

x Build robust knowledge and improve monitoring, early detection and forecasting in agriculture, including through increased use of space-derived geospatial data, for informed decision-making on aspects related to yield prediction, weather forecasting, biodiversity, fisheries, water availability and environmental impacts of agricultural land management.

x Adopt an integrated approach to natural resource management, including consideration of the food-energy-water nexus, through cross-sector decision-making mechanisms

x Support sustainable consumption and production through market development, including use of international standards and certification as well as policy and regulatory measures, giving due consideration to women's empowerment and gender-equitable participation

x Expand payments for biodiversity and ecosystem services in agricultural landscapes, based on improved management of the resource base; promote improved valuation of the services provided; improve measurement, reporting and verification of these; slow down and ultimately stop the expansion of agriculture into sensitive ecosystems.

x Stop unsustainable withdrawal of water resources, land degradation, biodiversity loss, and soil nutrient depletion and establish frameworks for sustainable production systems

x Support universal access to renewable energy services, including a shift to renewable forms of energy and more efficient use of energy for sustainable agriculture

x Strengthen international and national governance for sustainable resource use, with particular emphasis on the capacity of developing countries to participate

x Avoid recourse to and eliminate trade-distorting support policies and protectionism in adopting national measures to achieve the goal of sustainable agriculture.

x Establish accountability mechanisms for damage to the environment and/or human rights violations and to provide remedies for those rights that are violated.

III. The way forward

Commentary on lessons learnt from the MDGs stresses the need to integrate connected themes and say more about "how" to achieve the goals. The Zero Hunger Challenge, launched by the UN Secretary-General at Rio+20, reinforces this message with its emphasis on five priority areas for action, including three topics discussed in this issues brief: making food systems sustainable; reducing food waste and losses; and increasing smallholder productivity and income. With respect to sustainable agriculture, a first recommendation is to ensure that the SDG framework recognises its critical role as a driver of poverty eradication and development. A second recommendation is to connect sustainable agriculture, food systems and agri-food value chains with the eradication of hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition - for instance, in a single goal that may also include the access dimension of food security (e.g. rural poverty, income, social protection). However, there are many issues connected to food security, nutrition and sustainable food systems (e.g. energy access, education, health) and it may not be practical to cluster all of these together. Thus a third recommendation is to ensure that thematic interlinkages are articulated through i) indicators; and ii) principles, which could form part of a narrative associated with each goal as well as with crosscutting issues. These principles could be used to guide the national development of action plans for achievement of the SDGs, in which capacity needs assessments and cross-sectoral, multi-stakeholder partnerships would be critical.

A fourth recommendation is the provision of a platform whereby stakeholders with different aspirations would be in a position to discuss to define common goals in relation to food security. Sustainable agriculture should be able to contribute to the attainment of not only MDG 1 but also goals related to reducing child mortality and improving maternal health (MDGs 4 and 5, respectively), ensuring environmental sustainability (MDG 7) through sustainable food production and consumption patterns and empowering women (MDG 3) in light of the important role women have in this sector. Hence all stakeholders concerned with the multiple dimensions of agriculture should be involved in defining the agriculture of tomorrow. The Committee on World Food Security (CFS) and its high level panel of experts could play an instrumental role in such a process.

Another major issue to address in the formulation of SDGs is how to ensure that they meet the criterion agreed by countries in Rio+20 that they be "global in nature and universally applicable to all countries while taking into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development and respecting national policies and priorities". One proposal has been to imagine a set of global goals complemented by a menu of indicators for selection at the country level, with a common core definition (in the form of a set of principles and indicators to assess synergies and trade-offs), to which countries can add in light of national circumstances. It would be crucial to identify global and national goals/ targets and indicators through free, active and meaningful participation of all stakeholders, taking into account existing power imbalances.

In accordance with the above recommendations and considerations, the following options arise: How to ensure that inter-linkages between thematic clusters - or goals - are adequately articulated and taken into account in implementation of the SDGs

Agricultural sustainability is intimately linked to water and energy security and an integrated approach to these issues is essential. The food-energy-water or climate-land-energy-water-development nexus should be acknowledged in the formulation of the SDGs. This can be done through including in a goal on sustainable agriculture indicators relating to energy and water and through principles outlining the value of and options for the implementation of integrated decision-making processes to achieve synergies and adequately address trade-offs. Besides water, energy, land and climate, almost all priority themes identified by Rio+20 are also of relevance to sustainable agriculture, including employment, education, health, biodiversity and sustainable consumption and production, gender equality and women's empowerment, and the special concerns of Africa, LDCs and SIDS. For each of these topics, Member States may wish to consider whether to articulate inter-linkages through indicators and principles or through explicit targets.

How to incorporate the principle that the SDGs "should be global in nature and universally applicable to all countries while taking into account different national realities, capacity and levels of development and respecting national policies and priorities"

The SDGs could contain global targets, but in order to reflect the different national circumstances, these targets and timelines for their achievement may need to be established and monitored at the country or regional level. One way of fulfilling the condition agreed in Rio+20 with respect to sustainable agriculture might be to have a common target and core set of indicators, but timelines and additional indicators (chosen from a menu) adaptable to national circumstances. In addition, as the SDGs will apply to all countries, there will arise choices regarding the extent to which a country prioritises sustainable development within its borders or supports sustainable development in other countries. To this end, global minimum thresholds, such as the eradication of hunger and respect for critical ecological thresholds, need to be established as a priority and achieved through global partnership.

References Alexandratos, N. and Bruinsma, J. 2012. ESA Working Paper No. 12-03, June. In: FAO. World agriculture towards 2030/2050: the 2012 revision, Rome (available at http://typo3.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/esa/Global_persepctives/world_ag_2030_50_2012_rev.p df).

Biovision Discussion Paper. 2012. SDG/Post-2015 Goals on Food Security and Nutrition, and Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems (available at http://www.biovision.ch/fileadmin/pdf/e/projects/Discussion-Paper_SDG_Food-Agriculture_20130221_wMI.pdf).

Bruinsma, J. 2003. World agriculture: towards 2015/2030 and FAO perspective, (available at ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/005/y4252e/y4252e.pdf). FAO. 2006. Livestock's long shadow - Environmental issues and options. Rome.

FAO. 2009. The State of Food and Agriculture - Livestock in the balance. Rome. FAO. 2011a. The State of Food Insecurity in the World, How does international price volatility affect domestic economies and food security. Rome.

FAO. 2011b. Global food losses and food waste: extent, causes and prevention. (available at http://www.fao.org/docrep/014/mb060e/mb060e00.pdf)

FAO. 2011c. Save and Grow. A policymaker's guide to the sustainable intensification fo smallholder crop production. Rome, Italy.

FAO. 2012a. The State of Food Insecurity in the World, Economic growth in necessary but not sufficient to accelerate reduction of hunger and malnutrition. Rome.

FAO.

2012b. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2012. Rome. Foresight. 2011. Foresight. The Future of Food and Farming. Final Project Report.The Government Office for Science, London.

Giovannucci, D., Scherr, S., Nierenberg, D., Hebebrand, C., Shapiro, J., Milder, J. & Wheeler, K.

2012. Food and Agriculture: the future of sustainability. A strategic input to the Sustainable Development in the 21st Century (SD21) project. New York: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Division for Sustainable Development (available at http://www.saiplatform.org/uploads/Modules/Library/agriculture_and_food_the_future_of_sustain ability_web.pdf).

Godfray, H.C.J., Beddington, J.R., Crute, I.R., Haddad, L., Lawrence, D., Muir, J.F., Pretty, J., Robinson, S., Thomas, S.M. & Toulmin, C. 2010. Food security: the challenge of feeding nine billion people. Science, 327: 812-818.

Hazell, P.B.R. and Rahman A. (Forthcoming). New Directions for Smallholder Agriculture. Oxford University Press

HLPE. 2011. Price volatility and food security. A report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security, Rome, 2011.

IAASTD. 2009. International assessment of agricultural knowledge, science and technology for development (IAASTD): global report. Washington, DC.

IFAD. 2010. Rural Poverty Report: New realities, new challenges: new opportunities for tomorrow's generation. Rome: IFAD

IFAD

. 2012. Climate-smart smallholder agriculture: What's different? Rome: IFAD. IPCC. 2001. Climate change 2001. The scientific basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. J.T. Houghton, Y. Ding, D.J. Griggs, M. Noguer, P.J. van der Linden, X. Dai, K. Maskell & C.A. Johnson, eds. Cambridge, UK, and New York, USA, Cambridge University Press. 881 p.

Kabat, P.

2013. Water at a crossroads. Nature Climate Change, 3: 11-12 Karver, J., Kenny, C., and Sumner, A. 2012. MDGs 2.0: What Goals, Targets, and Timeframe? CGD Working Paper 297. Washington, D.C.: Center for Global Development, Washington, DC

MEA. 2005. Ecosystems and human well-being: Synthesis (available at http://www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/document.356.aspx.pdf).

Munang, R. Thiaw, I. & Rivington, M. 2011. Ecosystem Management: Tomorrow's Approach to Enhancing Food Security Under a Changing Climate. Sustainability 3: 937-954.

Munang, R. Thiaw, I. Alverson K., Goumandakoye, M., Mebratu D.& Liu, J. 2013. Using Ecosystem-Based Adaptation Actions to Tackle Food Insecurity. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development. 55:1, 29-35

ODI. Post2015.org - what comes after the MDGs?

Post2015.org - what comes after the MDGs? (available at http://tracker.post2015.org/). Stevenson, J., Byerlee, D., Villoria, N., Kelley, T. & Maredia, M. 2011. Agricultural technology, global land use and deforestation: a review. CGIAR, (available at: http://impact.cgiar.org/sites/default/files/images/SPIAlandJune2011.pdf).

Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 2013: Opportunities and Solutions for Sustainable Food Production. Background paper for the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. A. Dobermann & R. Nelson, (available at http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/01/Agriculture-Paper-for-HLP.pdf)

UNEP. 2010. Assessing the environmental impacts of consumption and production: priority productand materials. A Report of the Working Group on the Environmental Impacts of Products and Materials to the International Panel for Sustainable Resource Management. E. Hertwich, E. van der Voet, S. Suh, A. Tukker, M. Huijbregts, P. Kazmierczyk, M. Lenzen, J. McNeely & Y. Moriguchi. Nairobi.

UNEP. 2012. Avoiding future famines: strenghtening the ecological foundation of food security through sustainable food systems. UNEP Synthesis Report.

World Bank. 2007. World development report 2008: Agriculture for development. Washington, D.C.: World Bank

Yumkella, K.K., Kormawa, P.M., Roepstorff, T.M. & Hawkins, A.M. eds. 2011. Agribusiness for Africa's Prosperity. UNIDO. Austria.

Issues Brief 5: DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT1

I. Stocktaking

Understanding Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought (DLDD)

Land is a vital resource for producing food and other ecosystem goods and services including conserving biodiversity, regulating hydrological regimes, cycling soil nutrients, and storing carbon, among others. Indeed, the most significant geo-resource or natural capital asset is productive land and fertile soil. For those communities that rely heavily on land as their main asset, especially the rural poor, human well-being and sustainable livelihoods are completely dependent upon and intricately linked to the health and productivity of the land.

Between 1985 and 2005, the world's croplands and pastures expanded by 154 million hectares. In the last two centuries, humans have cleared or converted 70% of the grassland, 50% of the savannah, 45% of the temperate deciduous forest, and 27% of the tropical forest biome for agriculture2. Agriculture is estimated to be the proximate driver for around 80% of deforestation worldwide3. Productive land is becoming scarce. Population growth, climate change, unsustainable land use, land degradation and growing urban areas increase the pressure on productive land and water resources. At the same time, competition for productive land increases due to growing demand for food, fodder and agricultural raw materials for industrial and energy use.

Land degradation refers to any diminishment of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning that negatively impacts the provisioning of ecosystem services and ultimately impedes poverty eradication and sustainable development. Land degradation is caused by human activities and natural processes and is being exacerbated by the adverse impacts of climate change. In addition to unsustainable agricultural and livestock management practices, other sectoral activities contribute to land degradation thereby reducing socio-ecological resilience and food/water security. When degradation occurs in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas where productivity is constrained by water availability, it is called desertification.

Ecological and economic systems are also disrupted by drought. Drought, like land degradation, occurs in most parts of the world, including humid regions. From the 1970s to the early 2000s, the percentage of the Earth's land area afflicted by serious drought has more than doubled. While the world's drylands continue to be the most vulnerable and threatened by desertification, land degradation and drought (DLDD), land degradation is a global phenomenon with 78% of total degraded land located in terrestrial ecosystems other than drylands4.

DLDD processes have accelerated in the last century. Global assessments indicate that the percentage of total land area that is already degraded or being degraded has increased from 15% in

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the United Nations Development Programme. The preparation of this issues brief has been led by UNCCD. Contributors to this brief include: FAO, UNFPA, WMO, ESCAP, World Bank, UN Women, UNEP, UNDP, CBD, UNOOSA, ITU

2 FAO, 2011. The state of the world's land and water resources for food and agriculture (SOLAW) - Managing systems at risk. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome and Earthscan, London. 3 Kissinger, G., M. Herold, V. De Sy., 2012. Drivers of Deforestation and Forest Degradation: A Synthesis Report for REDD+ Policymakers. Lexeme Consulting, Vancouver Canada.

4 UN General Assembly, 2012. High-level meeting on addressing desertification, land degradation and drought in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication. A/65/861

1991 to 24% in 2008: with more than 20% of all cultivated areas, 30% of natural forests, and 25% of grasslands undergoing some degree of degradation5. Each year an estimated 24 billion tons of fertile soil are lost due to erosion in the world's croplands. DLDD directly affects 1.5 billion people around the world (by 2008 estimate) and has a disproportionate impact on women and children. Women bear the burden of land degradation but can also be part of the solutions. In this respect, gender sensitive investments in addressing the conditions of degraded land will not only contribute to achieving food security, poverty alleviation and sustainability but also contribute to improving the living conditions of women in ecosystems affected by DLDD.

DLDD necessitates a coordinated and coherent approach at national and international levels based on international norms.

DLDD and Linkages to Other Global Issues

Land is central to the "nexus" that links energy, food, water, and environmental health in an interdependent loop. Continued land degradation over the next 25 years could reduce global food production when population growth, rising incomes and changing consumption patterns are expected to increase food demand significantly. By 2030, the demand for food, energy, and water is expected to increase by at least 50%, 45% and 30%, respectively. These needs will not be met sustainably unless we preserve and restore the productivity of our land6. Business as usual will lead to more deforestation.

If hunger and food insecurity are to be overcome, an estimated 60% increase in agricultural productivity, including a 100% in developing countries, will be necessary by 20507. However, the world's ecosystems, biodiversity and associated goods and services are also under increasing pressure from the loss of crop diversity, the overexploitation of fish stocks, deforestation, degradation and losses of arable land, growing competition for increasingly scarce water and the adverse impact of climate change.

Worldwide, large areas of all continents are experiencing land degradation, with particularly high incidence along the west coast of the Americas, across the Mediterranean region of Southern Europe and North Africa, in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa and throughout Asia. Although land degradation is a generalized risk, some 40% of the world's degraded lands are found in areas with the highest incidence of poverty, which remains overwhelmingly rural.

Another compelling reason to view DLDD in its global context stems from the links between land degradation and two other major issues of global environmental change: climate change and biodiversity loss. Land is intimately related to climate change adaptation and mitigation, and its sustainable management provides a tool for addressing both. Maintaining and enhancing the condition of land contributes to biodiversity conservation and its sustainable management and provides a viable alternative to deforestation and the degradation of other ecosystems. Recent analysis suggests that increased global warming could lead to extreme events occurring more frequently and with greater severity in a globally synchronized way. This could significantly reduce our resilience to drought and disruptions to food systems at a global scale.

5 Bai ZG, Dent DL, Olsson L, Schaepman ME., 2008. Global assessment of land degradation and improvement. 1. Identification by remote sensing. Report 2008/01, ISRIC - World Soil Information: Wageningen.

6 International Food Policy Research Institute, 2012. 2011 Global Food Policy Report. International Food Policy Research Institute. Washington, DC.

7 FAO, 2011. The state of the world's land and water resources for food and agriculture (SOLAW) - Managing systems at risk. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome and Earthscan, London.

Sustainable Land Management (SLM) with its focus on soil structure and land cover improvements has the potential to make significant progress towards three critical global sustainability goals related to DLDD, namely food security, energy access, and water availability, SLM practices significantly enhance soil water retention capacity and improve water availability, as well as replenish and elevate the groundwater table. By addressing the nexus of food, energy and water in an integrated manner, rural poverty can be significantly alleviated with SLM and other ecosystem-based tools, such as drought risk management (DRM).

The Socio-Economic Impacts of DLDD

According to a recent study titled, The Economics of Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought: Methodologies and Analysis for Decision-Making, the global community is losing up to 5% of total agricultural gross domestic product (GDP) due to land degradation, costing some USD490 billion per year. The direct economic costs of land degradation at country level vary widely, with some countries experiencing even higher losses.

To tackle DLDD effectively, its drivers need to be addressed and instruments designed to incentivize SLM. Embedded in the understanding of the economics of DLDD is a set of methodologies for assessing the true societal impacts of land degradation, which includes issues such as migration pressures and conflicts over scarce natural resources. These form the foundation for determining how best to allocate financial, technical, and human resources to effectively tackle DLDD.

Recent Policy Developments Addressing DLDD

The issues of land degradation, desertification and drought and their adverse impact on sustainable development have long been a blind spot for the international community. The entry into force of UNCCD in 1996 constituted a policy response to this challenge. Nevertheless, at the time when MDGs were adopted in 2000, the challenge was still overlooked. In 2007, Parties to the UNCCD, in the Ten-Year Strategy, recognized that addressing DLDD would serve to improve livelihoods of affected populations, restore degraded ecosystems and generate global benefits through effective implementation of the Convention. The UN General Assembly high-level meeting in 2011 on DLDD was another landmark, which served to draw attention to the urgent need for the international community to prioritise DLDD. At the Rio+20 Conference, world leaders recognized that desertification, land degradation and drought, were challenges of a global dimension that affected the sustainable development of all countries and undertook to strive to achieve a land degradation neutral world and committed to monitor, globally, the status of land degradation and to reclaim degraded lands in arid, semi-arid and dry-sub-humid areas.

The recently held High-Level Meeting on National Drought Policy encouraged Governments around the world to develop and implement National Drought Management Policies, consistent with their national development laws, conditions, capabilities and objectives, guided, inter alia, by the following salient points: to develop proactive drought impact mitigation, preventive and planning measures, risk management, fostering of science, appropriate technology and innovation, public outreach and resource management, as key elements of effective national drought policy.

II. Overview of proposals

In the outcome document of the Rio+20 Conference (The Future We Want, paragraph 206), the Member States recognized the need for urgent action to reverse land degradation and agreed to strive to achieve a land-degradation neutral world in the context of sustainable development. If scientific predictions are correct with regard to the reduction of productive agricultural land caused by DLDD, it is likely that poverty rates would increase and food security would decline in many countries. In the worst case scenarios, famine and widespread starvation would result. Long-term inappropriate forestry practices, especially in tropical countries, will lower the productivity of forests on which the livelihoods of its users depend, and hence further aggravate poverty.

Goals and targets in the SDG framework for addressing the adverse impacts of climate change and biodiversity loss, including on poverty, would need to address DLDD since DLDD contributes substantially to biodiversity loss, exacerbates climate change impacts, and diminishes sustainable livelihoods and socio-economic development. A DLDD focused goal can help shape expectations and create the conditions for all stakeholders to monitor progress and take appropriate actions in addressing DLDD. Translating this aspirational goal into achievable results will require a concerted global shift to the sustainable management of land and water resources. A Land Degradation Neutral World (LDNW) is simply a world where we (1) prevent or avoid the degradation of healthy and productive lands through sustainable land management (SLM) and sustainable forestry management (SFM) practices, including agroforestry, sustainable agriculture and livestock practices, water management, and soil conservation, and (2) where feasible, regenerate land that is already degraded. As we welcome another two billion people to our planet over the next 30 years, it is clear that we must restore more land than we degrade.

One possible approach, proposed by the UNCCD secretariat, would be to define an overarching LDNW SDG as "sustainable land use for all and by all" (for agriculture, forestry, energy and urbanization) and make it operational with three concrete targets: (1) Zero net land degradation by 2030, or achieving net restoration of degraded lands by 2030; (2) Zero net forest degradation by 2030; and (3) Drought policies and drought preparedness measures put in place in all drought-prone regions/countries by 2020.

SLM and SFM along with conservation and restoration will protect and enhance biodiversity and ecosystem services. This will lead to improved rain infiltration, increased water storage and availability, more biomass, and greater food security which in turn will reduce pressures on land and the need to convert forest to cropland. These restorative activities will result in economic growth for local populations, businesses and, through interlinkages, the global economy. Investments in SLM are analogous to investing in underperforming assets where there is potential for big returns in terms of economic livelihoods and environmental sustainability.

To utilize their full potential, agricultural ecosystems must be managed as part of the wider landscape while reinforcing the natural resilience of the land. Deforestation, degradation of catchments/watersheds and land degradation, especially in LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS, all reduce nature's productivity as well as its resilience and its capacity to protect human communities.

Working towards a LDNW will require an appropriate mix of policy instruments and should be monitored and assessed on the basis of agreed upon indicators. Parties to the UNCCD have already agreed upon the use of a standardized set of performance indicators and eleven impact indicators are being considered, two of which are mandatory indicators on changes in land cover status and the proportion of the population living above the poverty line. Not only would a LDNW SDG create synergies with a number of other global commitments, it would also add value by: providing a strategic framework for sustainable land management policies; ensuring complementarity and coherence in addressing DLDD; ensuring predictability and concerted action globally; and stimulating action at all levels of governance.

III. The way forward

The potential benefits of addressing a LDNW in the SDG framework are significant in the short-term and essential for long-term food security, poverty eradication, and sustainable development.

Global Processes and Commitments

The international community and multilateral institutions now recognize the imperative to sustainably manage land, ecosystems and landscapes, and wherever possible to restore their ecological productivity. While SLM is essential to any effort to reverse the current trends in DLDD, there is increasing recognition that conservation and sustainable use are no longer sufficient to stem the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services. The second dimension of a LDNW therefore calls for halting and reversing declines in productivity by restoring and regenerating land that is already degraded. Global assessments and commitments, such as the Bonn Challenge, estimate that there are more than 2 billion hectares of degraded lands worldwide with the potential for forest, landscape, and more often mosaic restoration, in which forests and trees are combined with other land uses, including agroforestry and smallholder agriculture.

The three Rio Conventions - UNCCD, CBD, UNFCCC - and international organizations that are working towards sustainable development are well-positioned to assist countries in their quest for enabling policies, support, and approaches that address both the causes and effects of DLDD. Healthy soils and lands are critical natural capital assets that form the basis for not only agricultural productivity but also biodiversity and a multitude of ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration and well-functioning hydrological regimes. The goal of a LDNW embodies conservation, sustainable use and restoration, providing the building blocks of sustainable development.

Recognizing the multiple benefits that would result from a LDNW - as well as the need for consistent assessments and monitoring tools to support the convergence of objectives outlined above - will encourage effective policy and investment approaches among the Rio Conventions and other relevant partners. In order to make the most of these synergies, it is essential that collaboration and coordination begin at the level of implementation. In addition, a post-2015 global development framework will be essential to catalyze policy and mobilize resources in order to improve the conditions of the underperforming assets (land) of the poor and restore their productivity in order to effectively and sustainably achieve poverty eradication as well as food-energy-water security.

Bridging the Science-Policy Gap: Knowledge Transfers and Capacity Building

Meaningful progress towards a LDNW will require a solid and up-to-date scientific and technical basis and the wide availability of knowledge and lessons learned from previous experience. Hence the imperative to establish a globally agreed and recognized, credible and transparent authority on scientific and technical knowledge on land and soil, including land degradation and desertification. Establishing a global data-base in cooperation with key global institutions such as the FAO, UNEP and the Global Environment Facility would be valuable for measuring and monitoring the extent of impacts on productivity, the environment and populations affected at local, national and regional levels, generating pilot projects in regions with DLDD 'hotspots', and quantifying the impacts of adopting SLM and other interventions (on soil quality, water resources, populations affected, and land cover) as well as for developing recommendations at the global and regional levels to facilitate the implementation of strategies and policies to achieve a LDNW.

Another important aspect in bridging the science-policy gap is the understanding and respect for traditional and local approaches to natural resource management. In many low and middle-income countries, traditional knowledge and practices related to sustainable agriculture, livestock, and agroforestry management can make significant contributions to rebuilding ecological infrastructure and reversing land degradation. In a multi-level stakeholder approach to SLM, scientific information must be coupled with indigenous knowledge to offer a better basis for decision-making.

At the same time, advanced technologies, such as high resolution satellite images and meteorological satellite data, in conjunction with historical/existing ground-based data and maps, provide information necessary to examine the nature, trend and scope of DLDD processes and formulate relevant policies. It is therefore imperative to strengthen capacities of policy makers to

access and use Earth observation and in-situ data and information in a timely manner to monitor the state of land degradation and desertification and to predict and assess the extent of droughts in

support of decision making processes at the national, regional and international levels.

While recognizing the current limitations of global and national datasets, baseline assessments and periodic monitoring utilizing biophysical and socio-economic indicators of DLDD will nonetheless be required to demonstrate and measure progress towards a LDNW. Mapping and other tools emerging from data-based spatial analysis are developing rapidly, offering a number of techniques that allow us to measure and compare biophysical, climatic, and ecosystem status and trends and, more recently, ecosystem services in the landscape context. These tools will be essential for policy- and decision-makers in prioritizing land management and regeneration efforts. National, sub-national, and local assessments will be useful to governments, corporations, and communities when formulating policies and action plans that identify appropriate interventions for halting and reversing land degradation trends.

Partnerships and resource mobilization for a landscape-based multi-sectoral approach

Partnerships at all levels will be needed to achieve a LDNW. In this regard GEF and the development banks will have a crucial role to play. Enhanced resource allocation to the GEF land degradation focal area would be a smart investment and would yield multiple benefits. An inclusive, partnership-building approach whereby relevant stakeholders can participate and engage in long-term commitments would also be important. Local partnerships among governments, corporations, and communities have proven successful in leveraging scarce resources to address DLDD, and making the transition from degraded and unproductive lands to those that are sustainably managed.

All sectors of the economy benefit directly or indirectly from nature and their engagement is required for the transition to green economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication. Above all, land regeneration should be seen as the foundation for an integrated development strategy that involves diverse stakeholders with common goals -- starting with food and water security, jobs and sustainable livelihoods, drought and disaster mitigation, and the ongoing struggle to reduce poverty and socio-economic inequality.

IV. In Summary

If we do not take bold action to protect, restore and manage land and soils sustainably, we will not achieve our commitments for climate change adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity conservation, forest and MDG targets; we will not alleviate rural poverty and hunger, ensure long-term food security or build resilience to drought and water stress.

At Rio+20, world leaders agreed to strive to achieve a land-degradation neutral world in the context of sustainable development. We must recognize that the many millions of people who manage agricultural systems, from the very poorest to the most commercialized producers, constitute the largest group of natural resource managers on earth. Their decisions, as well as those of the world's 7 billion consumers, will shape global food and nutrition security and the health of the world's ecosystems into the future. The challenge is to support better decisions by using all the tools at our disposal for reversing land degradation trends and gearing towards a LDNW.

V. References

(2) FAO, 2011. The state of the world's land and water resources for food and agriculture (SOLAW) - Managing systems at risk. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome and Earthscan, London.

(3) Kissinger, G., M. Herold, V. De Sy., 2012. Drivers of Deforestation and Forest Degradation: A Synthesis Report for REDD+ Policymakers. Lexeme Consulting, Vancouver Canada.

(4) UN General Assembly, 2012. High-level meeting on addressing desertification, land degradation and drought in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication. A/65/861

(5) Bai ZG, Dent DL, Olsson L, Schaepman ME., 2008. Global assessment of land degradation and improvement. 1. Identification by remote sensing. Report 2008/01, ISRIC - World Soil Information: Wageningen.

(5) International Food Policy Research Institute, 2012. 2011 Global Food Policy Report. International Food Policy Research Institute. Washington, DC.

(6) FAO, 2011. The state of the world's land and water resources for food and agriculture (SOLAW) - Managing systems at risk. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome and Earthscan, London.

Box 1 - Perspective from the country-level "Water is central to human needs, equitable growth and development. It is one of the key drivers of sustainable economic growth through contribution to activities such as agriculture, manufacturing, mines, energy and transport. It contributes to social activities such as productive use of water within households (poverty alleviation), water for drinking, sanitation and health, etc. It should therefore be managed in a manner that is sensitive to and supportive of the many competing demands that is placed on it. Further, the management activities should not compromise the requirements of the future as well as ecological requirements. Based on these elements, water should be central to the integrated planning and development processes - South Africa." Source: GWP (2013) National Stakeholder Consultations on Water: Supporting the Post-2015 Development Agenda

Issues Brief 6: WATER AND SANITATION

1

I. Stocktaking

The Future We Want adopted at the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) recognized that "water is at the core of sustainable development" and its three dimensions.2 Water is the lifeblood of the planet and of critical importance for all socio-economic development.

Reconfirming previous commitments made in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and Millennium Declaration, as well to the human right to safe drinking-water and sanitation, Member States committed at Rio+20 to:

- the progressive realization of access to safe and affordable drinking-water and sanitation for all ;

- significantly improve the implementation of integrated water resources management at all levels as appropriate;

- protect and sustainably manage ecosystems, as they play a key role in maintaining water quantity and quality;

- address water-related disasters, such as floods and droughts, as well as water scarcity;

- significantly reduce water pollution, increase water quality and significantly improve wastewater treatment;

- improve water efficiency and reduce water losses.

The pervasive linkages between water and other priority areas are also reflected in the Rio+20 outcome document, where references to water are made in the following sections: food security and nutrition and sustainable agriculture; sustainable cities and human settlements; health and population; biodiversity; desertification, land degradation and drought; as well as mountains.

The achievement of the MDG drinking-water target3 demonstrates that setting international goals

and targets can drive change. The increase in access to drinking-water has been achieved through

sustained commitment, additional resources and effective implementation approaches. Estimates

show that aid to the water sector has risen significantly since 2001.4

Governments, donors, civil society organizations and development partners have together formed the Sanitation and Water for All Partnership, which provides a transparent, accountable and results-oriented framework for action to address the obstacles for global progress in the drinking-water and sanitation sector.

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. The preparation of this issues brief has been led by UN-Water. Contributors to this brief include: DESA, FAO, ILO, OHCHR, PBSO, UNCBD, UNCCD, UNDP, UNECE, UNECLAC, UNEP, UNESCAP, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNOOSA, UNU, UN-Women, WHO, World Bank, WTO, as well as

Yet, significant obstacles remain to realize the human right to safe drinking-water and sanitation.

Today, 800 million people, are without access to an improved water source and many more remain without safe and sustainable water supply. Indeed, it is likely that the number of people using safe water supplies has been over-estimated, since water quality testing was not feasible on a global scale at the time when the MDG target was formulated. In addition, disparities continue to exist between and within countries. For example, the poorest in sub-Saharan Africa have only experienced limited progress in drinking-water coverage. Moreover, not enough attention has been given to the interlinkages between service provision and managing surface and groundwater water resources, as well as to sustainable mechanisms for financing and maintaining water supply services and infrastructure. If sustainability aspects are not duly considered, there is considerable risk of slippage on the gains made in extending these services.5

The MDG sanitation target is today the most lagging of the MDGs.

2.5 billion people live without improved sanitation. 1.1 billion people still practice open defecation. Without significant policy change and investment, around 1.4 billion people are projected to be without access to sanitation in 2050.6 Trends in sanitation show that South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa are struggling with particularly low coverage rates and that disparities in rural and urban sanitation are even more pronounced than those in drinking-water. Still, much has been achieved considering that almost 1.8 billion people gained access to improved sanitation facilities since 1990. Some countries that started from a low baseline and are facing rapid population growth have made substantial progress in absolute terms, but have to work much harder to halve the proportion of the population without access.7

Evidence shows that the sanitation and hygiene sub-sector suffers particularly from human, institutional and financial resources constraints. As in the case of water supply, cost-effective technological solutions for sanitation and hygiene are readily available. The challenge is rather to ensure that sound practices and services are sustained. This requires adopting behavioural change approaches and scaling-up services that are appropriate within the local context and accompanied by adequate human, institutional and financial arrangements for long-term operation and maintenance. Drinking-water continues to attract the majority of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) funding, even in countries with relatively high drinking-water supply coverage and relatively low sanitation coverage. In addition, hygiene promotion including handwashing and menstrual hygiene management, critical for public health and gender equality, was not reflected in the MDG framework and has been relatively neglected. Evidence also demonstrates the linkages between the lack of sanitation and malnutrition, with long-lasting effects on human capital and growth. The most recent estimates suggest that, globally, the benefits of achieving universal access to sanitation outweigh the costs by a factor of 5.5 to 1, whereas for universal access to drinking-water the ratio is estimated at 2 to 1.8

Discrimination and inequalities in access to WASH are pervasive. Inequalities exist between countries; urban and rural areas; slums and formal urban settlements; men and women; and disadvantaged groups and the general population. In many countries, women and girls carry the burden of fetching water. Poor water and sanitation conditions also affect their health negatively, including sexual and reproductive health. The MDGs' focus on aggregate outcomes tends to mask these inequalities and improvements in access do often not reach those groups who suffer most,

5 WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water Supply and Sanitation (2012): Progress and

Managing water sustainably to meet today's needs and future demands is ever more urgent. Interruptions in water supplies intended for human and productive uses have immediate impacts on livelihoods and economies. Water supply crises have been identified in a survey of over 1000 experts from industry, government, academia and civil society as one of top three global risks.10 Over 1.7 billion people live today in river basins where Box 2 - Water for irrigation and food production Water for irrigation and food production constitutes one of the greatest pressures on freshwater resources. In many countries, water availability for agriculture is already limited and uncertain, and is set to worsen. Agricultural water withdrawal accounts for 44% of total water withdrawal in OECD countries, 74% in the BRICs and over 90% in the least developed countries. With global population growth projections of 2-3 billion people over the next 40 years, food demand is predicted to increase by 60% by 2050. FAO estimates an 11% increase in irrigation water consumption from 2008 to 2050. Although this seems a modest increase, much of it will occur in regions already suffering from water scarcity. Sources: FAO (2011a), AQUASTAT online database. Rome, FAO; FAO (2011b), The State of the World's Land and Water Resources: Managing Systems at Risk. London, Earthscan.

(FAO, 2011b).

including the elderly, persons with disabilities, women and children. This is also reflected in the fact that schools and health centers often lack drinking-water and sanitation facilities. The future development agenda could overcome and eliminate inequalities by setting targets and by requiring the disaggregation of data by gender, age and disadvantaged groups so that they can be monitored.

One clear lesson from the MDGs is that the water challenge goes beyond access to WASH for all and encompasses water resources and wastewater management and issues of water quality.

While Heads of State pledged in the Millennium Declaration to "stop the unsustainable exploitation of water resources by developing water management strategies", the current MDG framework did not address the broader water agenda, including the development and management of water resources and wastewater management and issues of water quality. As highlighted by the Post-2015 Thematic Water Consultation, access to WASH, food and energy production, disaster risk reduction, economic development and healthy ecosystems rely on the availability and sustainable management of water resources. Examples of the positive impact of water on economic growth and poverty reduction include irrigation and hydropower as well as flood management. The value of wetlands for human well-being has been estimated at several trillion US dollars.9

Managing water sustainably to meet today's needs and future demands is ever more urgent. Interruptions in water supplies intended for human and productive uses have immediate impacts on livelihoods and economies. Water supply crises have been identified in a survey of over 1000 experts from industry, government, academia and civil society as one of top three global risks.10 Over 1.7 billion people live today in river basins where Box 2 - Water for irrigation and food production Water for irrigation and food production constitutes one of the greatest pressures on freshwater resources. In many countries, water availability for agriculture is already limited and uncertain, and is set to worsen. Agricultural water withdrawal accounts for 44% of total water withdrawal in OECD countries, 74% in the BRICs and over 90% in the least developed countries. With global population growth projections of 2-3 billion people over the next 40 years, food demand is predicted to increase by 60% by 2050. FAO estimates an 11% increase in irrigation water consumption from 2008 to 2050. Although this seems a modest increase, much of it will occur in regions already suffering from water scarcity. Sources: FAO (2011a), AQUASTAT online database. Rome, FAO; FAO (2011b), The State of the World's Land and Water Resources: Managing Systems at Risk. London, Earthscan.

water use exceeds recharge, leading to the desiccation of rivers and depletion of groundwater. As countries develop and populations grow and urbanize, their demand for water is projected to increase by 55% by 2050.11 Two thirds of the world's population could be living in water-stressed countries by 2025 if current consumption patterns continue.12 At the same time climate change is anticipated to increase spatial and temporal water variability as well as extreme events such as floods and droughts which are already on the rise. The degradation of ecosystems due to human activity has already, and is expected to further exacerbate water scarcity and flooding. These trends could increase the risk of conflicts over water. To achieve poverty eradication and universal human development, while respecting the Earth's finite and vulnerable water resource base, water productivity needs to be enhanced, appropriate infrastructure developed, an integrated approach to water resources management implemented, water governance systems improved at all levels and the ability of ecosystems to support sustainable water management protected and restored.

Recent results from a survey of 130 countries show that there has been widespread adoption of integrated approaches to water management worldwide, but significant challenges remain.13 Since

9 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005): Ecosystems and Human-Being: A Framework for Assessment,

Box 3 - The need for greater energy efficiency in wastewater treatment The treatment of wastewater requires significant amounts of energy, and demand for energy to do this is expected to increase globally by 44% between 2006 and 2030 especially in non-OECD countries where wastewater currently receives little or no treatment. Sources: IEA (2009), World Energy Outlook, Paris, IEA; Corcoran et al. (2010): Sick Water? The Central Role of Wastewater Management in Sustainable Development, The Hague, UN-Habitat /UNEP/GRID-Arendal.

1992, 80% of countries made some progress in improving the policy, legal, institutional and financial framework for water resources management in response to the 2002 Johannesburg Plan of Implementation which stated that all countries should develop integrated water resources management and water efficiency plans. While the benefits of improved water governance in some cases have been far reaching, the results from the survey also show that this clearly remains an ongoing process for most countries. Infrastructure development is advancing in some important areas including storage dams for water supply and hydropower. However, fewer countries report advanced implementation for irrigation, rainwater harvesting and investment in natural systems. Evolution towards efficient water use has been uneven across sectors and regions. Progress on integrated approaches to water resources management is demonstrated by a strong correlation between progress on the enabling policy environment and a positive impact on management practices. Improving implementation capacity and stakeholder participation is perceived as a major challenge by many countries. Other constraints to the development of appropriate institutional arrangements relate to unclear mandates and difficulties in cross-sectoral coordination.

Improved knowledge, research, innovation and implementation towards much more productive and sustainable use of water, especially for food and energy, will be required to meet the world's future fuel and food needs. Through a better combination of technical solutions and political commitment to sustainably meet competing needs of multiple users, wise water management offers enhanced livelihoods, including through job creation, a safer environment, improved economic activity and better overall health and well-being. The urgency of increasing water productivity and adopting sustainable production and consumption patterns to meet projected future demands needs to be matched by progress in this area.

Water remains at all levels a catalyst for coordinated policy, shared management, and peaceful cooperation between countries. Enhanced cooperation over water issues could contribute to more efficient management, with positive impacts on water quantity and quality, as well as reducing potential for conflicts. Addressing water and sanitation also requires vertical integration of policies (from national to subnational and municipal levels), as well as data sharing, capacity building and decentralized cooperation.

There is a pressing need to improve global freshwater quality by addressing water pollution and making better use of wastewater. It has been roughly estimated that about 80% of wastewater from human settlements and industrial sources worldwide is discharged directly untreated into water bodies, with detrimental effects on human health and the environment.14 Nutrient pollution from urban wastewater and agriculture - one of the most widespread water quality problems - is projected to worsen in most regions of the world, intensifying eutrophication and damaging coastal ecosystems. Improving the quality of the world's water resources requires pollution reduction including by collecting and treating contaminated water and restoring, managing and protecting the ability of ecosystems to regulate water quality. Moreover, particularly in the context of water scarcity, wastewater should be considered a resource, highlighting the need for policies, investments and practices for safe reuse and recycling. The lack of reliable data and scientific assessments remains a  challenge to support the development and implementation of sustainable water resources policies. Progress in this regard could be facilitated through continuous and improved monitoring and data capture, including through remote sensing technologies.

II. Overview of proposals

Several proposals for integrating water and sanitation issues into the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) framework have been made so far. These can be broadly grouped in two categories. The first category is those that integrate the social, economic and environmental dimensions of the water challenge in one single SDG on water. Proposals falling under this category tend to combine an access to safe drinking water and sanitation target; a water resources management and water use efficiency target; and a water quality target. The second category is those that compile clusters of SDGs that each addresses a different development dimension, i.e. basic human needs; natural resources management etc. In this case different water-related issues would be addressed in different goals.

A) A Sustainable Development Goal on Water including Sanitation

This approach has been put forward among others by:

x The African Minister's Council on Water (AMCOW). Under the heading "[to] ensure a water secure world for all", AMCOW suggests three targets: 1) "Universal access to safe water, improved sanitation and hygiene by 2030"; 2) "Increase productive use of water resources under managed conditions to X% of harvest potential by 2030"; 3) "By 2030, water quality is assured and safeguarded for all uses". See http://www.amcow-online.org/images/docs/outcomes_of_the_tunis_post_2015_water_ consultations.pdf.

x The UN Secretary General's Advisory Board on Water and Sanitation (UNSGAB). UNSGAB recommends a Global Goal on Water which includes the following objectives: 1) "Achieve universal access to sustainable sanitation and to drinking-water that is really safe"; 2) "Increase wastewater management and pollution prevention"; 3) "Improve integrated water resources management and water-use efficiency". In order to address inter-linkages between water and other sectors, the Board also recommends including water efficiency targets in other post-2015 goals (e.g. in a potential goal on food) and calls for taking into consideration water-related disasters.

See www.unsgab.org/content/documents/UNSGABpost2015brief.pdf.

x The UN Global Compact's CEO Water Mandate. The role of business in advancing potential post-2015 policy objectives related to water was discussed at a multi-stakeholder meeting in March in Mumbai. One idea advanced was that targets should relate to or support one or more of the three sub-streams of the

Thematic Consultation on Water (WASH, WRM and wastewater management and water quality). Learning from past experiences of the MDGs, business leaders suggested that water objectives be addressed more broadly than a single focus on WASH and that more societal players, including the private sector, will need to be involved in their achievement.

See http://ceowatermandate.org/files/CEO WaterMandateMumbaiPost2015MeetingKey Outputs.pdf.

x Several countries support a standalone water goal that refers to a "water-secure

Box 4 - The JMP Post-2015 consultative process The WASH sub-sector has undertaken a consultative process, convened by WHO and UNICEF as the Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation, to consider WASH in the post-2015 agenda. Proposals for detailed WASH targets have been developed, which can be summarized as: 1. Everyone has water, sanitation and hygiene at home; 2. All schools and health centres have water, sanitation and hygiene; 3. No one practices open defecation; 4. Water, sanitation and hygiene should be equitable and sustainable. The reduction of inequalities is proposed as a fundamental indicator of progress. The Sanitation and Water for All partnership supports these proposals. See: www.wssinfo.org/post-2015-monitoring. Similar consultative processes on water resources management, wastewater management and water quality are currently ongoing.

world". Building on the three streams of the Thematic Consultation on Water, such a goal would address three pillars: 1) "Safe and sustainable drinking-water, sanitation, and hygiene for all"; 2) "Water resources to be managed sustainably in order to satisfy human needs by respecting ecosystem requirements"; 3) "All wastewater to be managed based on the concept of reduction/omission, treatment and reuse/discharge". See www.eda.admin.ch/eda/en/home/dfa/head/ speech/single.html?id=48242.

The many proponents of a stand-alone water SDG argue, among other things, that all water issues are connected through the hydrological cycle. The complex interrelations between the various water-related needs require an integrated approach which would be better catalyzed by keeping these aspects together in one SDG.

In a recent paper the Overseas Development Institute also points out that water issues could come together in a single goal as they are closely interrelated with human development objectives and environmental sustainability concerns.15

B) Inclusion of water and sanitation aspects in different Sustainable Development Goals

This approach has for example been put forward by:

x The European Commission in a recent Communication to the European Parliament. The paper suggests that the framework could address the following clusters of issues by 2030: 1) "ensuring basic living standards"; 2) "promoting the drivers for inclusive and sustainable growth"; 3) "ensuring sustainable management of natural resources"; 4) "promoting equality, equity and justice; and peace and security". In this framework, access to water supply and sanitation falls under "ensuring basic living standards"; overcoming water scarcity and reducing water losses under "promoting the drivers for inclusive and sustainable growth"; and sustainable water resources management under "ensuring sustainable management of natural resources". See http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/documents/2013-02-22_communication_a_decent_life_for_all_post_2015_en.pdf.

x The Special Adviser to the UN Secretary-General on the MDGs proposes a framework for sustainable development composed of four interconnected dimensions: 1) economic development and ending poverty; 2) social inclusion; 3) environmental sustainability; and 4) good governance and personal security. Water issues here would be dealt within the economic and the environmental dimensions.

See http://unsdsn.org/files/2012/12/121220-Draft-Framework-of-Sustainable-Development.pdf.

Proponents of this approach argue, among others, that bringing together related policy objectives along different dimensions would limit the number of goals and allow numerous related sectors (e.g. access to energy, food, health, water; global management of the global commons etc.) to be addressed jointly.

III. The way forward

Through the Post-2015 Global Thematic Consultation on Water16, stakeholders from around the world have been taking stock of the lessons learned from the implementation of the MDGs and have made proposals to address key global challenges in water to inform the post-2015 development framework in ways that are measurable, inter-generational, pragmatic, and rest on the sustainable and equitable use of water. Additionally, the Global Water Partnership facilitated national stakeholder consultations on water in support of the post-2015 agenda in 20 countries17.

The recommendations emanating from the above discussions suggest that the future agenda should seek to achieve but also build on and go beyond the MDGs and existing commitments. The new agenda should encourage an integrated approach to water expressed in universally agreed goals which are simple, measurable and able to focus policies, resources and all partners on delivering concrete outcomes that improve people's lives and protect their future and the environment.

The following reflections that emerged from the Thematic Water Consultation might also be considered when discussing the water and sanitation agenda post-2015:

x Water is a key determinant in all aspects of social, economic and environmental development and should therefore be a central focus of any post-2015 framework for poverty eradication and global sustainable development.

x Safe Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene, the Management and Development of Water Resources, Wastewater Management and Water Quality are all indispensable elements for building a water-secure world.

x Not adequately addressing water issues risks contributing to crises in water-dependent sectors. Water security will be of growing importance on the political agenda.

x Governments play a key role in securing water for competing demands, and also in protecting resources and ecosystems in a long-term perspective. However the quest for a water-secure world is a joint responsibility and can only be achieved through water cooperation at local, national, regional and global level and through partnerships with a multitude of stakeholders ranging from citizens to policy makers to the private sector. People must be able to participate in decisions on water and sanitation that affect their lives.

x Water-related capacity development, both at the individual and institutional levels, will be fundamental in the realization and implementation of the post-2015 development agenda.

Regarding the way forward, the Global Thematic Consultation on Water also recommended that there should be an ambitious goal and set of targets that take account of unfinished business and the emerging and future challenges. This goal should inspire and create incentives for a change in behaviour to manage and allocate resources in a sustainable way such that benefits reach every person without discrimination.

In order to achieve water security for all, the following potential targets were proposed: equitable and universal access to safe and sustainable water, sanitation and hygiene; ground and surface water should be developed and managed sustainably and in an integrated manner to satisfy human needs while respecting ecosystem requirements; and all used water and wastewater should be collected and treated before it is returned to nature and managed under principles of pollution prevention and safe reuse.

16 The World We Want Thematic Consultation on Water. See http://www.worldwewant2015.org/topics/160275 and consultation report:

While the centrality of water issues is particularly relevant to an SDG framework that has poverty eradication and sustainable development at its core, the very local nature of water poses challenges to reconcile a universal goal with the variety of national, local or basin-specific realities. More work is needed on targets and indicators and definitions, and on identifying data-needs to capture the many dimension and inter-linkages and to ensure national relevance and measurability. In this regard, the UN system stands ready to provide its technical support and expertise, including through the UN-Water Working Group on SDGs.

Issues Brief 7: EMPLOYMENT AND DECENT WORK

1

I. Stocktaking

Widespread concern for the lack of quality job opportunities was one of the key issues that emerged from the national and thematic consultations on the post-2015 agenda organized by the UN. Better job opportunities also ranked among the top four development priorities in the UN 'My World' global survey in over 190 countries. Jobs were a concern for people of all ages in all countries. This is not surprising given current trends and prospects in the global labour market.

A series of crises - food, fuel, financial - have exacerbated an already precarious jobs situation. Global unemployment is estimated to have increased by 28 million as a result of the global economic crisis, reaching a total of almost 200 million in 2012. This figure is projected to grow further in the near term. Moreover, some 39 million people have dropped out of the labour market largely from discouragement, opening a 67 million global jobs gap since 2007.2

Unemployment and inactivity increased sharply in the advanced economies. Although it accounts for less than 16 per cent of the global workforce, the Developed Economies and European Union region contributed to more than half of the total global increase in unemployment over the past five years and it experienced a drop of 2.3 percentage points in the share of its economically active population. In the developing world, the impact of the economic crisis was less visible at least in terms of the numbers of those who are registered as unemployed. This divergence reflects economic resilience and the adoption of more effective labour-oriented stimulus packages, but also structural features of labour markets in poor countries that make existing statistics on unemployment an inadequate indicator of labour market distress.

Despite much progress in the quality of life over the past decades, the majority of workers in the developing countries remain trapped in informal and vulnerable jobs with meagre incomes, uncertain prospects and limited protection from social, economic and environmental risks. The opportunities for full-time regular wage employment are limited and most people have few options other than subsistence farming, unpaid work or unpredictable casual work at a daily wage. This is often especially true for women, who are underrepresented in wage employment in most regions3 and further bear the burden of unpaid care work and other social restrictions. In 2012, own-account or contributing family workers accounted for 56 per cent of all workers in the developing world-1.49 billion people - down from 62 per cent registered in 2000, but still quite high. Landless casual labourers are prevalent in many rural areas and are among the most vulnerable group of workers.

A positive development over the past decade has been the sharp decline in the relative number of the working poor, defined as those people who are in employment but belong to households living below the $2 a day poverty line. From 55.2 per cent in 2000, the share of the working poor over total employment in the developing world has declined to 32.1 per cent in 2012, but it remained at nearly 60 per cent in the LDCs in 2009. Progress has been uneven across regions, with more than 87

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is cochaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. This Issues Brief has been prepared by the ILO, DESA, ESCAP, IFAD, IOM, UNDP, UNFPA, UNIDO, and UN WOMEN. Decent work combines access to full and productive employment with rights at work, social protection and the promotion of social dialogue, with gender equality per cent of the reduction occurring in East Asia.4 The pace of reduction, moreover, has slowed down recently as a consequence of the economic crisis. A parallel positive trend has been the rapid increase in the numbers of the developing world's "middle-class and above" workers, i.e., those workers living with their families on above US$4 a day.5 This is a significant development as it opens up opportunities for consumption and investment and it could contribute to raise workers' productivity and foster citizens' voice. A significant 15 per cent of the developing world's total workforce, however, is still living in extreme poverty, i.e., below $1.25 a day - nearly 400 million workers, two thirds in South Asia and Sub Saharan Africa - mainly engaged in hazardous and precarious work in agriculture.6

Globally, a large portion of the unemployed, about 75 million, are young women and men. Youth unemployment is reaching alarmingly high levels in the developed world. By the second quarter of 2012, the youth unemployment rate exceeded 15 per cent in two thirds of the advanced economies, with peaks of over 50 per cent in some countries.7 This was accompanied with longer unemployment spells and strong signs of retreat from the active search for work. In the OECD countries, around one in six young people belong to the NEET group, i.e., they are neither in employment nor in education or training. Even among those who are employed, non-standard and less stable jobs, including temporary and part-time employment, are increasingly the norm.

Young people in the developing world account for 90 per cent of global youth. Their situation is equally difficult, if not more. Unemployment figures vary across regions. They are the highest in the Middle East and North Africa, where more than one in five young economically active people are unemployed.8 Unlike advanced economies, unemployment rates may be higher for young people with secondary rather than primary or no education. Unemployment rates are also usually higher for vulnerable groups and for females than males, although the most pronounced gender differences occur with respect to labour market participation.

The most critical challenge for the youth in developing countries is the high number of those who are engaged in irregular work instead of attending school. In six of ten developing countries surveyed, over 60 per cent of young people were either unemployed, working but in low quality, irregular, low wage jobs, often in the informal economy, or neither in the labour force nor in education or training. This percentage is a better indicator of the scope of potential problems in the youth labour market than the traditional unemployment rate.9 The lack of jobs is an acute problem especially for the youth in fragile situations and post-conflict or conflict-affected countries, where it fuels unrest and instability10 and it requires specially targeted promotion measures.

The quality of jobs and livelihoods is a concern for all workers, not only for women, youth and other groups at disadvantage in the labour market - ethnic groups, migrants, people with disabilities. The growth in real average wages has fallen behind increases in labour productivity in both developed and developing economies over the past two decades. In most countries, the workers' share of national income has been shrinking, with implications on aggregate demand and the sustainability of

4 GET, 2013, Table 14b. 5 GET, 2013, Box 3. 6 GET, 2013, Table 15a. 7 ILO, Global Employment Trends for Youth (GETY): A generation at risk", May 2013. 8household debts.11 Trends in cumulative real wage growth since 2000 show a decline in the Middle East, stagnation in the developed economies and an increase around 20 per cent in Latin America and Africa. The global average was raised by Asia, where wages almost doubled.12 There remain however considerable absolute differences in wage levels across regions.13

Differences in pay are just one aspect of the differences that exist in the conditions of work and employment across countries. The majority of workers and their families in developing countries have no or very limited access to basic social protection.14 Work is often precarious and informal and simple measures of safety and health at the workplace are neglected, in some cases even in those production units that cater to branded global value chains. As a result of the economic crisis, freedom of association, collective bargaining and other internationally recognized labour standards are increasingly under threat while there remain many cases where trade union democratic rights are severely restricted or utterly suppressed.15

The quantity and quality of jobs will remain major development challenges well beyond 2015. Job deficits and dislocations across countries and sectors will occur as a result of recurring instability and cyclical fluctuations in the global economy, compounded by structural changes - demographic trends, labour-saving technological innovation, the geographical reshuffling of global supply chains, urbanization and the transition to environmental sustainability. The failure to address the labour market gaps generated by those factors might have a bearing on the social and political conditions conducive to economic growth and development.

The effects of demographic growth can reasonably be projected. Currently, the world labour force is increasing by over 40 million per year. The rate of increase is gradually declining and by 2020 will be about 37 million. Projecting to 2030, the annual increase is likely to average around 31 million per year. To keep pace with the growth of the world's labour force, some 470 million new jobs will be needed over the fifteen-year period from 2016 to 2030. Were participation rates to improve, for example due to increased female participation, the number of jobs needed would be higher. A major policy effort will be required to ensure those jobs are decent and contribute to inclusive growth and sustainable development.

Differences in population dynamics are likely to add to labour market pressures. The population of the least developed countries, about 60 per cent of which is now under the age of 25, is projected to double to 1.67 billion by 2050, with about 15 million entering the working age population every year.16 At the other end of the spectrum, the population of some developed and emerging economies is rapidly ageing, exerting growing pressure on their social security systems and generating labour and skills shortages. Managing the migratory pressures that might result and ensuring that migrant workers are adequately protected and their rights recognized will be a main task for the international community.

II. Overview of proposals

11 ILO, Global Wage Report 2012-2013, 2013. 12 ILO, Global Wage Report 2012-2013, Table 1; gender wage gaps have declined in most countries between

1999-2007 and 2008-2011 but it is not clear whether this is a sign of improvement or the effect of sectoral

Several proposals have been made to integrate employment and decent work into a new generation of goals - sustainable development goals (SDGs).17 They fall into three broad categories.

The first category includes proposals where employment and decent work are built-in as a stand-alone goal, usually encompassing targets for priority areas relating to main economic, social and environmental dimensions. For instance, the concept note on SDGs submitted by the Governments of Colombia, Peru, and United Arab Emirates suggested an "Enhanced Employment and Livelihood Security" goal as one of a total of eight SDGs. Such a stand-alone employment and livelihood goal would cover four potential issue areas: economic, social and environmental policies for employment generation; entrepreneurship and enterprise development; women and youth participation in labour markets; and social protection.18 The Governing Body of the International Labour Organization also called for adopting full and productive employment and decent work as an explicit goal of the global development agenda beyond 2015, including a reference to the need for social protection floors.19 Other proponents of a stand-alone goal on full employment and decent work include the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC),20 NGOs, research institutes and experts.21 Finally, in their final report the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda proposed a candidate goal 8 (out of 12) on "Create jobs, sustainable livelihoods and equitable growth", with a set of targets and indicators on good and decent jobs and livelihoods, youth, productive capacity and business development.22

The second category includes proposals where employment and decent work sit alongside other targets as a way of fostering an integrated approach to achieve one higher-order goal such as poverty eradication (as was already the case for MDG1), inclusive growth or human development. In its proposition to end extreme poverty by 2030, the World Bank makes a reference to job creation as a key enabler, needed to ensure that economic growth translates into poverty reduction. In a similar vein, the NGO Save the Children suggests to include the goal of "eradicating extreme income poverty through inclusive growth and decent work" as the first in a set of ten goals aimed at providing the foundations of human development.23 Other proposals in this category suggest to prioritize employment creation in promoting transformation and sustainable growth in Africa, 24 or as one pillar of a candidate goal 1 on "inclusive economic growth for dignified livelihoods and adequate standards of living", as in the so-called Bellagio goals.25

The third category considers the topic of employment as a cross-cutting issue to be mainstreamed in other goals. The main example so far is in the Action Agenda for Sustainable Development formulated by the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN). Recognizing that reducing youth unemployment is a core priority for most countries, the SDSN proposal includes targets for

17 For a comprehensive list see ODI (http://tracker.post2015.org/), the Canadian International Development

Platform (http://cidpnsi.ca/blog/portfolio/tracking-post-2015/), and the Stakeholder Forum http://www.sustainabledevelopment2015.org/einventory/ 18 http://post2015.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/indicative-sustainable-development-goals.pdf 19 See ILO post-2015 concept notes 1, Jobs and livelihoods at heart of the post 2015 development agenda,

http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/post-2015/documents/WCMS_193483/lang--en/index.htm 20 http://www.ituc-csi.org/IMG/pdf/ituc_briefing_paper_on_decent_work_in_the_post-2015_agenda.pdf 21 See for instance "A Post-2015 Jobs Goal: 500 Million New Paid Jobs by 2030",

http://international.cgdev.org/blog/post-2015-jobs-goal-500-million-new-paid-jobs-2030?utm_= 22youth employment and refers to rural employment and urban employment respectively under its proposed goal 3 on education and learning, goal 7 on agriculture and goal 7 on cities.26

III. The way forward

The international community has repeatedly endorsed the goals of full employment and decent work for all - the aspiration to quality jobs for people in both developing and developed economies. Both goals were recognized as desirable outcomes in the MDG framework, but were integrated late and only as a target in achieving MDG1.

The challenge in setting the SDGs is to identify which priorities and key drivers behind the generation of better job opportunities should be encapsulated into a practical agenda for action, where progress can be adequately measured and monitored. Five considerations should be taken into account.

1.

Improving labour market statistical information. Current data do not fully account for the reality of labour markets in developing countries. As most people cannot afford not to work even if the job provides only a subsistence income, variations in the total number of the unemployed and the employed, as currently counted, are poor benchmarks for targeting and monitoring progress on job creation, poverty reduction and development. Gender-disaggregated data and information on the duration, security and quality of employment and the level of wages and earnings are especially lacking. A concerted global effort to revise the scope and improve the national collection of statistics would produce valuable results with a minimum input.

2.

Focus on productive capacities and the quality of jobs. National action is the primary mechanism to formulate the strategies for productive transformation and private sector development that constitute the backbone of sustainable employment generation. Setting job creation as either goal or a target under a set of SDGs should help mobilize new partnerships among different national stakeholders: the unemployed, women, youth, minorities, potential employees in sunrise industries but also the main actors in the economy - private sector and trade unions.

A central task of development strategies will be to maximize the potential of structural economic change in sustaining increases in employment and productivity. Structural change in the form of movements of workers out of agriculture into activities with higher productivity in industry and services has been a main driver behind sustained growth, employment and poverty reduction in developing countries in the past decades. There are signs that those sectoral reallocations are slowing down in several regions as a result of the economic crisis and the decline in global investment. Policies to promote productive transformation and structural change will have to be a key part of the policy packages to promote employment and decent work, in line with the opportunities, resources and needs of each country. Some poor countries may wish to reposition their economies to attract simple manufacturing production, at the same time as avoiding the risk of falling into a low wage,-low productivity trap or prompting a race to the bottom in terms of labour standards and working conditions. Others might benefit from the new opportunities to relocate services opened up by technological developments. Where poverty is widespread, special attention will have to be paid to enhancing productivity and earnings in agriculture, a sector which accounts for large numbers of jobs, especially for women, and where decent work deficits are widely recognized. The scope of development and sectoral strategies would be different from country to country. In each country and sector, however, monitoring progress in the quality of the jobs generated in terms of productivity, income, status and security would provide a yardstick to assess whether positive transformation is actually being achieved and sustained.

One main lesson of the MDG experience for the design of the new agenda is that employment and decent work are not an automatic outcome of policies targeting only economic growth, and that better jobs do not necessarily mean more expensive or fewer jobs. The fundamental driver of long-term sustainable employment is the expansion of productive activity arising from investment and entrepreneurial opportunities, with sound government institutions committed to the rule of law, human rights and property rights. While there are minimum standards that cannot be breached - enshrined in international human rights including fundamental principles and rights at work - decent work deficits are gradually overcome as people move from subsistence farming to industry and to advanced services in urban and rural areas, from unemployment or informal employment to formal employment and from low to high skill jobs. Achieving decent work is a dynamic process of successive improvements in wages, working conditions, labour institutions and standards of employment and social protection that is related to the structural transformation of an economy. Policies and institutions to prompt, broaden and consolidate those improvements play a role in driving the economics of structural transformation forward. In other words, productive employment and decent work are the outcomes of a judicious mix of economic and social measures, not a residual result of expanding output.

3.

A labour market perspective on environmental sustainability. Climate change mitigation and adaptation will entail a process of structural change towards new technologies and more sustainable modes of consumption and production. Significant steps toward sustainable and inclusive development will require a framework where the environmental and jobs dimensions are tackled simultaneously. Without acting on urgent environmental problems, many jobs could be lost due to environmental degradation, resource depletion and disasters, with serious implications for the most vulnerable groups of the population. At the same time, new market opportunities could arise from the promotion of new sustainable industries provided incentive structures are in place and adequate investments are made, for instance through a shift to sustainable farming in rural areas where most poor people live. Policies should focus on promoting jobs, incomes and skills in new industries but also facilitating adjustment in traditional sectors. If the adjustment is properly managed and alternative jobs are available, job losses and associated costs and resistance in the conventional high emitting and polluting sectors could be minimized, making it easier to negotiate and reach agreement on how to move ahead.

4.

A holistic policy approach. A job angle is critical to many aspects of development: poverty eradication, environmental sustainability, food security and nutrition, rural and urban development, health and population, gender equality, equity and peaceful societies. Employment and decent work targets could indeed be instrumental in achieving a variety of SDGs in those areas. Yet, employment and decent work are the outcome of a complex gamut of measures, which includes agricultural, industrial, labour and other policies and institutions; no single instrument or set of policies is likely to be sufficient. Should employment be tackled within the framework of an SDG on education, agriculture or the environment, it will be important to ensure that the implementation process brings on board other relevant line ministries and government agencies.

5.

A full international dimension - The range of policies for employment and decent work encompass several complex cross-border issues. International frameworks for macroeconomic coordination, finance, trade, labour standards, migration and climate change are important enablers. The SDG framework should focus on a few, concrete and action-oriented objectives; it might not be able to cover all those enabling factors. Whether employment and decent work are built-in as a goal or a target, it will be important to build bridges, complementarities and synergies with existing relevant international frameworks and processes. Such goal or target should be seen as a way to stimulate steps forward in international policy coherence and coordination. It might even add momentum to addressing and overcoming bottlenecks that forestall progress in negotiations in some of those broad areas.

Issues Brief 8: SOCIAL PROTECTION

1

"We stress the need to provide social protection to all members of society, fostering growth, resilience, social justice and cohesion, () In this regard, we strongly encourage national and local initiatives aimed at providing social protection floors for all citizens." (Rio+20, The future we want, paragraph 156)

Social protection2 is one of the foundations for inclusive, equitable and sustainable development. It can simultaneously address the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainability. Social protection addresses not only the symptoms of poverty and social exclusion, but also some of their underlying structural causes. It can have a transformative role in contributing to long-term inclusive and sustainable growth while also enhancing resilience against natural and manmade disasters, as well as economic and social crises. Social protection policies can support climate change adaptation and help to ensure a just transition towards more sustainable development patterns. By ensuring at least a minimum well-being through a guaranteed access to essential goods and services that provide protection against life contingencies, social protection can play a pivotal role in freeing people from fear of poverty and deprivation and in delivering on the promises of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and international human rights norms and standards. It also promotes opportunities for individuals and societies by helping people to adapt their skills and overcome constraints that block their full participation in the productive system in a rapidly changing economic, social and environmental context. In particular, it can help address inequality and discrimination that women experience in accessing basic social services, economic opportunities and resources, by promoting gender equality and women's empowerment. It is an investment in human capital development and in more productive, inclusive and equal societies.

I.

Stocktaking

Despite the rapid introduction of social protection programmes in some countries, the extension of basic social protection guarantees remains a major development challenge in many countries for the coming years. Access to adequate social protection is still restricted to too few people. Of the global population, 80 per cent are still not covered by comprehensive social security schemes to help them cope with life's contingencies. Nearly one-third of the world's population has either

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is cochaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. This note was prepared by ILO, UNICEF, ESCAP, FAO, IFAD, OHCHR, UNAIDS, UN DESA, UNDP, UNFPA, UN-WOMEN, WFP, WMO, and with contributions from members of the Social Protection Interagency Cooperation Board (SPIAC-B).

2 The meaning of social protection varies across countries depending on national circumstances, institutions

and legislations. For the purpose of this note the term social protection refers to a set of public and private policies and programmes aimed at preventing, reducing and eliminating poverty, deprivation and social exclusion and enhancing resilience and opportunities through promoting human capital and connecting people to decent and more productive employment. It can comprise various types of programmes, including cash transfers, in kind support and social services such as child and family benefits, sickness and health benefits and services, disability, old-age and survivors' benefits, food and nutritional support, maternity protection, public works, employment guarantee and unemployment/underemployment support schemes and others. This can be provided through universal schemes, social insurance, social assistance and safety nets, and negative income tax schemes. Social Protection Floors are nationally-defined sets of basic social security guarantees designed to ensure at a minimum that, over the life cycle, all in need have access to essential health care and basic income security that would enable people to have effective access to essential goods and services defined as necessary at the national level. For further information, please consult: ILO, 2012: "The strategy of the International Labour Organization: Building social protection floors and comprehensive social security systems." UNICEF, 2012. "Integrated Social Protection Systems: Enhancing Equity for Children. and The World Bank, 2012: "The World Bank 2012-2022 Social Protection and Labour Strategy".

inadequate access or no access at all to health services. For many more, the cost of accessing these services without adequate health insurance or other provisions may mean financial ruin for their households. Every year 100 million people are either pushed into poverty by health-related costs, including out-of-pocket expenses for health care, or are unable to afford essential health services. Worldwide, approximately 50 per cent of the elderly are receiving an old age pension, but only 31 per cent of the current working-age population can expect coverage from contributory pensions.3 Less than 5 percent of those unemployed receive unemployment benefits in Africa and the Middle East, and less than 10 per cent receive them in Asia and Latin America.4 The lack of coverage disproportionally affects the most food insecure, undernourished, shock-prone and vulnerable populations in the world. Moreover, only a fraction of the around 860 million people who are undernourished - the majority of whom work in agriculture - are supported through safety nets programmes under a social protection framework.

Traditional social insurance policies are a fundamental component of social protection, but the high degree of labour market informality in many countries pose structural limits to contributory schemes in reaching the most vulnerable, demonstrating the need for more inclusive social protection programmes. Women, children, youth and migrant workers are particularly vulnerable. Women continue to be overrepresented among the poor and among those lacking access to basic social services, and are underrepresented and underpaid in the labour market. Meanwhile, more than 74 million young people worldwide are unemployed; others face precarious work offering few, if any, benefits or guarantees.

One of the core lessons learned from the MDGs experience is that fragmentation among development goals and lack of coordination can compromise effectiveness and lead to inefficiency in resource allocation.  The Social Protection Floor (SPF) approach provides a coherent and consistent policy tool which addresses multidimensional vulnerabilities in an integrated and interconnected way. Nationally defined social protection floors offer a means to ensure a renewed and comprehensive focus on poverty prevention and eradication, while also addressing broader development aspects related to health, education, inequality, decent employment and livelihoods, food security, nutrition and inclusive growth. By combining nationally defined guarantees of, at a minimum, basic income security with the effective access to essential social services in the form of national social protection floors, linkages and potential synergies can be enhanced across the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development.

The contribution of social protection to the achievement of economic objectives takes two forms. The first is in building resilience against shocks and prolonged crises that threaten to undermine the progress made under the MDGs and to send the most vulnerable deeper into poverty. By strengthening people's assets and well-being and by providing predictable income before or in response to crises, social protection can be an effective tool to protect people against the effects of natural and manmade disasters. Similarly, social protection measures in both developing and developed countries have cushioned the impact of the recent economic crisis, served as a macroeconomic stabilizer fuelling aggregate demand, and enabled people to avert or to better overcome the risk of poverty and social exclusion. The second way in which social protection responds to economic challenges is in promoting more inclusive and sustainable growth. Development policies that aim to provide universal access to health care, education and income guarantees through social protection systems in turn foster healthier, more productive, and more equitable societies. Social protection represents an investment in a country's human development, no less important than investments in its physical infrastructure, which can support structural transformations of the economy and the society. Social protection systems enable a country to unlock the full productive potential of its population. Regular and reliable income transfers can also help to unlock productive entrepreneurial capacity, increase labour market participation5, and boost local development and job creation6. If well designed, they can facilitate improvements in the productive capacity of poor households through investment in productive assets and facilitating asset accumulation, easing credit and liquidity constraints and promoting decent work.

Social protection policies have proven to be effective in reducing poverty7 and inequality8. In developed countries it is estimated that levels of poverty and inequality are approximately half of those that might be expected in the absence of such provisions. In some developing economies, major social transfer programmes that combine income support with enhanced access to social services, in particular in the areas of health, education and nutrition, are showing a similar potential to reduce inequality and poverty. In a very short period of time, they have been extended to large numbers of people, contributed to liberate people from poverty and deprivation, and helped to break the inter-generational transmission of poverty. A renewed commitment to end extreme poverty in this generation and to build fairer societies should continue to tackle the multidimensional causes of poverty and social exclusion.

Social protection plays a vital role in supporting people exposed to food insecurity and can contribute to addressing the causes of food insecurity and malnutrition. Providing resource transfers is increasingly recognized as a potential means to help poor people overcome underlying causes of food insecurity such as insufficient local investment in boosting food supply and productivity9. It includes initiatives that provide income (cash) or consumption (food) transfers to the poor, protect the vulnerable against livelihood, market and production risks, and enhance the social status and rights of the excluded. International evidence has shown the positive impacts of cash and in-kind transfer programmes on the nutritional well-being of children in poor households, with long-term implications for their adult lives. School feeding is one of the most widely adopted safety nets worldwide, with more than 300 million children having access to school meals globally. Cash transfers injected into poor communities also help to reactivate local agricultural production by creating the means to finance demand for locally produced goods as well as local investment in their production. Similarly social protection has contributed to smoothing the impact of volatile food prices on vulnerable groups.

Social protection systems that are designed in a gender-sensitive manner can also contribute to greater women's empowerment. They can empower women and girls by contributing to substantive educational and nutritional improvements as well as giving them improved access to health care, including sexual and reproductive health, and facilitating greater participation in the labour market and in decent employment. It is important to ensure that social protection programmes do not reinforce gender stereotypes through their design, for example, by assuming

5 Barrientos and Nino-Zarazua, 2010. Effects of non-contributory social transfers in developing countries; a compendium.

6 Samson, 2009. The impact of social transfers on growth, development, poverty and inequality in developing countries.

7 See for example Gassmann and Behrendt, 2006. Cash benefits in low-income countries: Simulating the effects on poverty reduction for Senegal and Tanzania; and ILO, 2010. World social security report 2010 and ILO-UNDP, 2011, Sharing Innovative experiences: Successful Social Protection Floor experiences.

8 Lpez-Calva et al., 2010. Explaining the Decline in Inequality in Latin America: Technological Change, Educational Upgrading, and Democracy; d Lustig et al., 2013. Deconstructing the Decline in Inequality in Latin that women are exclusively responsible for childcare. Social floors aiming at universal protection automatically also address some of the essential needs of often systematically excluded groups, including women, migrant workers, ethnic minorities, people living with disabilities, and others. By preventing poverty and destitution for the large majority of the population, social protection efforts can address the underlying structural causes of poverty, social injustice and unrest. Extending protection to previously unreached or excluded population groups can encourage greater social cohesion and allow people to live a life in dignity.

Social protection systems have the potential to shield people from multiple risks, short and long-term shocks and stress associated with increased climatic shocks and the increased level of exposure to hazards occurring in degraded ecosystems. Social protection can help cushion the short-term costs of structural transitions to greener economies, by protecting those who are negatively affected by structural changes and need time to adjust. Basic social protection may also provide incentives for poor people to engage in conservation activities and environmental protection and to shift to more sustainable practices involving environmental management and sustainable agriculture, particularly as most of the highly food insecure populations reside in degraded environments that are highly exposed to shocks (droughts, floods, cyclones, etc). People who are focused on daily survival usually do not give priority to environmental quality like forest, soil and water conservation activities. A certain level of income and food security is necessary to support and empower them to engage in environmental conservation and environmentally sensitive livelihoods.

Social protection is a tool for all countries - high, middle and low-income - to address their respective development challenges. Experiences in expanding social protection in an increasing number of middle and low- income countries10, as well as evidence from multiple quantitative analyses, have shown that basic levels of social protection are affordable at virtually any stage of economic development.11 Affordability relates not only to fiscal space but also to a society's willingness to finance social transfers through taxes and contributions and achieve a more equitable distribution of income.

Social protection is based on widely shared principles of social justice, and is grounded in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948, UDHR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966, ICESCR), the Convention on the Rights of the Child, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other human rights instruments, as well as the ILO Conventions and Recommendations on social security and nationally-defined social protection floors. It directly relates to the human right to social security and social protection and contributes to the realization of various other human rights, including the right to an adequate standard of living, food, health and education. The important role of social protection, in particular the role of national social protection floors, in national social and economic development has over the last few years been recognized by a number of further international bodies and fora, such as the UN General Assembly resolution on the MDG Summit "Keeping the promise" (2010) and the outcome document of the UNCSD Rio+20, "The future we want" (2012).

II. Overview of proposals

In 2008, the Overseas Development Institute and the Chronic Poverty Research Institute raised concerns on the limitations of the MDGs in reaching the most poor and vulnerable populations and called for a Social Protection MDG or at least for the inclusion of a social protection target within an existing goal12. More specifically, the authors proposed setting the goal of access to basic social protection for all poor and vulnerable people by 2020.13

Social protection emerged as a core priority in UNDG national and thematic consultations on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. Many in the national consultations "called for greater social protection, especially where jobs are fragile or unorganized, as well as where food insecurity is most prominent"14. Cross cutting references to social protection appeared prominently in the thematic consultations on Growth and Employment, Inequalities, Health, Population Dynamics and Hunger, Food Security and Nutrition.

The Report of the Secretary General High Level Panel on the Post 2015 states that no one should be left behind and calls for goals that focus on "reaching excluded groups, for example by making sure we track progress at all levels of income, and by providing social protection to help people build resilience to life's uncertainties." The Panel proposes that by 2030 everyone should be covered by social protection systems and suggests a specific coverage indicator as part of a goal on poverty eradication.

The Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations has advocated inclusion of the implementation of the ILO Recommendation 202 on social protection floors in the SDGs15. The NGO Committee on Social Development has launched a Campaign and an online petition to support the extension of social protection floors16.

The International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) has also called for a sustainable development goal related to the implementation of social protection floors. It suggests specific targets and indicators on income security for the unemployed, the sick, the disabled, pregnant women, children and the elderly as well as on access to health care, education, housing and sanitation.17

References to the role of social protection in the post 2015 development framework were already made in the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals when addressing issues related to poverty eradication, food security and nutrition. The summary of the second session of the OWG on SDGs (17-19 April 2013) mentioned that "Social protection was regarded as the backbone of a wider set of policy measures to ensure livelihoods of women, employment and decent jobs" and as key tool to address the multi-dimensional aspects of poverty18.

III.

The way forward

It is important to underline that there is no single social protection model. Countries should identify their own pathways in progressively developing comprehensive social protection systems specific to

12 ODI, 2008. Achieving the MDGs: The fundamentals Success or failure will be determined by underlying issue.

Briefing paper 43. 13 Chronicle Poverty Research Institute, 2008. Escaping Poverty Traps. 14their national contexts. There is a range of diverse social protection instruments - including social security, social insurance, social transfers (in cash and in kind) and other forms of social assistance, exemptions, subsidies for social services, and labour market policies connected to social protection - that need to be employed in different combinations to address national needs. The specific design parameters, policy framework, administrative systems, coordination mechanisms that are most effective will vary according to context. What is critical is identifying the mix required to provide a comprehensive social protection system.

Despite the diversity of models, global and national goals should aim towards increasing the breadth, adequacy, and effectiveness of social protection coverage. Progressive horizontal expansion of coverage needs to be combined with ensuring that programmes and benefits are adequate to meet their intended goals.

Keeping this in mind, the design of goals and targets may take different forms including the following:

a) Social Protection as a goal itself, in line with the human rights framework and social protection as critical to enhancing human capabilities.

b) A goal on poverty and social protection, specifically linking social protection to multidimensional poverty eradication.

c) Incorporation of social protection across a number of other relevant goals, as targets and/or indicators. Inclusion of social protection floors, specifically, is a possible option. This relates to ongoing discussions on options for other sustainable development goals such as Employment and Decent Work, Health and Food Security and Nutrition.

d) A combination of b) and c), whereby a goal of poverty reduction may include a specific target on social protection coverage and other targets/indicators are included under the respectively relevant goals.

Regardless of which option is pursued, at a global level there is a core set of indicators that would be important to include in a global "dashboard" to meaningfully measure progress:

x Percentage of the population with access to predictable cash benefits in case of need, considering people in active age, older persons, persons with disabilities, migrants and families with children.

x Percentage of the population protected against the financial costs of ill-health (e.g. through social health insurance or other mechanisms).

x Percentage of school-age girls and boys with effective access to universal, free primary and secondary education.

In addition to these core indicators and in line with the principle of nationally defined floors, there should also be a dashboard of indicators that can be selected as appropriate for different countries. Some examples could include specification of coverage of benefits by population groups (percentage of older people receiving pension; percentage of families with children protected against the financial costs of ill-health (e.g. through social health insurance or other mechanisms), percentage of people with disabilities receiving disability benefits, percentage of unemployed receiving unemployment benefits, percentage of poor receiving income and food consumption support, percentage of children who do face financial barriers to affording primary school, percentage of the food insecure population assisted through formal social protection programmes).

The principle of progressivity is critical in tracking distribution and effective social protection coverage for vulnerable and excluded populations. Each of these indicators should be disaggregated to track the inclusion of different groups, for instance by income, sex, age, race, ethnicity, disability, etc.

To support expansion of social protection coverage, as a foundation of inclusive sustainable development, action will be needed to strengthen national systems (i.e. through the development of social protection policies, programmes and partnerships):

Strengthening linkages across sectors and with broader economic and social policy: Social protection helps bring a coherent systematic approach to addressing multidimensional vulnerabilities in an integrated way across multiple objectives. In order to ensure a holistic approach to sustainable development, policies to improve social protection and those to increase coverage and access in other social sectors, such as education, health, nutrition, and housing, need to be mutually reinforcing. In addition, social protection must work together with a mix of broader economic and social policies - pro-poor macroeconomic, industrial, employment, and agricultural policies and social inclusion and anti-discrimination policies - to ensure the achievement all three dimensions of sustainable development.

Design, implementation and governance: Social protection systems need to be carefully designed and implemented in order to ensure their effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability and inclusiveness. For example, an important prerequisite is the issue of identification cards, especially for excluded groups, to enable access to social protection programmes. Inclusive design and implementation also needs to take into account the added vulnerabilities faced by specific groups, related to exclusion and discrimination due to gender, ethnicity, disability, etc. Strengthening monitoring, accountability and participation mechanisms, in formulation and implementation, both ensures the effectiveness of social protection programmes and improves their governance and transparency.

Sustainability of social protection systems - financing and political support: Social protection should be financed, in principle, by national resources. Identification of the right mix of domestic financing and ways to expand fiscal space over time are essential to deliver sustainable social protection systems. Their sustainability also relies on political will and broad-based support in society. The idea of establishing a Global Fund for Social Protection19 was launched by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to food and the United Nations Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights.

Partnerships: At the national level, the division of responsibilities is an important factor. Governments are ultimately responsible for the development of social protection, but other partners such as the private sector and civil society also play an important role. At the international level, cooperation among governments and coordination and support from international organisations is necessary. Positive ongoing experience in exchange and cooperation between states in social protection should be expanded. Progress in cooperation of international organizations needs to result in enhanced harmonization at policy and country level. Only through the synergy achieved by putting together the organizational infrastructure, funds, manpower and knowledge of the diverse nation states and international partners will it be possible to build a social protection future for the billions who need it.

Improving availability and quality of data: Regardless of the indicators chosen, it will also be necessary to improve data collection and statistics on social protection at the national and global levels in order to track progress.

Issues Brief 9: EDUCATION AND CULTURE

1

EDUCATION

Education is a fundamental human right and the bedrock of sustainable development: it contributes to all three dimensions of sustainable development - social, economic, and environment - and underpins governance, and security of the individual. The interconnected dividends that result from investments in equitable quality education are immeasurable - generating greater economic returns and growth for individuals and societies, creating a lasting impact on public health, decent work and gender equality, and leading to safer and more resilient and stable societies.

As an enabling factor for the multiple dimensions of societal development, quality education is a key lever for sustainable development. It plays a crucial role in shaping personal and collective identities, promoting critical social capital and cohesiveness, and responsible citizenship based on principles of respect for life, human dignity and cultural diversity.

I.

Stocktaking

Education is one of the core 'unfinished businesses' of the MDGs that must be prioritized in the post-2015 development agenda.

The efforts to achieve MDGs in the past 13 years have yielded unprecedented human progress.:

From 2000 to 2010, more than 50 million additional children were enrolled in primary school. A large

majority of these are girls who now attend primary and secondary schools.

Despite this progress, primary school enrolment has slowed since 2004, even as countries with the toughest challenges have made large strides. 61 million children of primary-school-age (more than half in Sub-Saharan Africa) and 71 million children of lower secondary-school-age children currently remain out of school.8 Approximately 120 million children either never make it to school or drop out before their fourth year.9 Rural-urban disparities in access

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is cochaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. The following TST members contributed to the preparation of this brief: UNESCO, UNICEF, UNFPA, WFP, ILO, ITU, UNV, OHCHR, PSO, UNDP, and IFAD.

2 UNESCO, 2011. EFA Global Monitoring Report - the hidden crisis: armed conflict and education. 3 Gene Sperling and Barbara Herz, 2004. "What Works in Girls' Education: Evidence and Policies from the

Developing World," Council for Foreign Relation, Center for International education. 4 See above, note 2.

5 UNESCO, 2009. EFA Global Monitoring Report - overcoming inequalities: why governance matters. 6 Save the Children, 2013. Food for Thought - Tackling child malnutrition to unlock potential and boost

Investment in quality education, particularly for girls, generates immediate and intergeneration paybacks across all dimensions of sustainable development. x Each extra year of a mother's schooling reduces the probability of infant mortality by 5% to 10%.2 x A year of secondary education for girls correlates with as much as a 25% increase in wages later in life.3 x On average each additional year of schooling for a country's population reduces that country's chances of falling into civil war by 3.6%.4 x People of voting age with a primary education are 1.5 times more likely to support democracy than people with no education.5 x Well-nourished children are 13% more likely to be in the correct grade at school, boosting lifelong skills.6 x If all students in low-income countries left school with basic reading skills, 171 million people could be lifted out of poverty, resulting in a 12% cut in global poverty.7

to education also remain significant in many developing countries, and in some regions rural enrolment rates are half those in urban areas.10

The focus on access and completion has not been sufficiently complemented by what children actually learn in school.  At least 250 million children are not able to read, write or count well even among those who have spent at least four years in school.11 In the least developed countries one quarter of young men aged 15 to 24 and one third of young women aged 15 to 24 are illiterate.12 In low- and middle-income countries, as many as 200 million young people (58% girls) have not completed primary education, failing to acquire the necessary skills for a successful transition to adult life and decent jobs. 775 million adults - almost two-thirds of whom are women - still lack basic reading and writing skills and there has been slow progress on the provision of early childhood care and education.

The emphasis on global targets imposed one-size-fits-all targets for countries, irrespective of countries' diverse starting points, financial resources and capacity. Such a 'one-size-fits all' approach has often compromised national priorities: for instance, stalling the educational agenda in countries where a key challenge has been to improve quality in primary schooling, and to boost access to secondary and higher education, and ensure the relevance of the skills acquired. However, more and more countries have been able to successfully adapt global targets to address their particular challenges and needs in the education sector.

Inequalities in education remain a big challenge, and poverty and exclusion the major markers of disadvantage. Exclusion from education occurs most often among girls, rural and indigenous peoples, working children, children living in conflict, orphans, migrants and nomads, children with disabilities, persons living with HIV/Aids, and persons living in conflict and disaster contexts, and linguistic and cultural minorities.13 Poor, rural girls often face multiple disadvantages through gender discrimination and violence, sexual and reproductive health issues including teenage pregnancy, and poverty which bar them from enrolling and lead to dropouts at greater rates than boys.14 Young adolescents from the poorest households are three times more to be out of school as those from the richest households.15 Provision of quality education also remains a challenge in disasters and conflict or post-conflict contexts, with children from these contexts comprising around 40% of out-of-school children.

The expansion of access to primary education has resulted in growing demand for secondary and tertiary education. This is also accompanied by growing concern for transferable skills development: there are more young people than ever, disproportionately concentrated in the developing world and about three times as likely as adults to be unemployed. Indeed, too many young people and adults, particularly women, are currently unable to develop the skills, knowledge and attitudes they need for today's rapidly changing technologies and world of work. Adequate technical and vocational education and training systems should provide young people with the skills to seize economic opportunities and find decent jobs.

Inadequate attention had been paid to the financial, human capital and infrastructural resource constraints which undermine progress towards achieving effective learning environments for

10 IFAD, 2011.  Rural Poverty Report. 11 See above, note 15.

12quality education. In particular, to provide quality universal primary education (UPE) for all by 2015, 114 countries will need at least 1.7 million more teachers by 2015.16 Increased spending and national budgets on education have been important ingredients in positive educational outcomes in the period 2000-2010. But recent aid stagnation to education has resulted in the need for an additional US$ 26 billion annually to achieve basic education in poor countries.

II.

Overview of current proposals

As part of the post-2015 deliberations, various goals have been proposed for education highlighting: i) expanded access and completion; ii) the provision of quality education and learning; iii) the enabling conditions necessary for quality education and learning; iv) a renewed focus on gender equality; v) the need for measurable targets and indicators, which allow for regional and national adaptation, taking into account the rural urban divide. 17 Across many of the proposals, the following success factors are identified for education and these strongly resonate with the SDG agenda and correspond with the lessons learned from the MDG and Education for All (EFA) efforts:

x

A focus on access to education for all at all levels. A lifelong learning approach, including access to early childhood care and education (ECCE), post-basic and higher education, and adult learning and non-formal education, and responding to country contexts and settings, development challenges and priorities, including in conflict-affected countries. Expanding access to education requires for the formal education sector to establish innovative partnerships with non-governmental service providers, private sector, communities and parents.

x

A greater focus on equity. The need for disadvantaged children, youth and adults to acquire relevant technical and vocational skills combined with the necessary transversal skills for a decent life and work should be fully reflected in education policies and strategies. Reaching out to out-of school children and youth using innovative, flexible and mobile interventions, including school-feeding programmes, and partnering with non-formal education providers and communities should be a priority, especially for those countries that have large out-of-school populations.18

x

Gender equality remains a high priority, with a renewed focus on enhanced access to post-basic and post-secondary education for girls and women in safe, supportive learning environments.

x

A renewed focus on relevant and measurable learning outcomes,19 such as foundational literacy and numeracy, as well as other relevant social, civic, economic, agricultural, environmental and health-related skills and competencies; and ensuring there is an adequate supply of well-trained and motivated teachers and learning materials to support the desired learning outcomes and curriculums that impart relevant life skills and competencies. Greater commitment to fund education and skills development for all, particularly for rural populations, is needed.

x

A greater focus on skills and training. Ensuring young people are equipped with social, employability and technical skills and competencies to be informed, responsible and active

16 See above, note 15. 17 Some of these constituents and proposals include, but are not limited to, Save the Children, the Basic

Education Coalition, The Global Campaign for Education, Education International,

Commonwealth

Ministerial Working Group on the Post-2015 Development Framework for Education,

Oxfam, the InterAgency Network on Education in Emergencies, the UN Girls' Education Initiative, the Global Partnership for Education, The Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI) and the Korea Development Institute, Results for Development Institute and the Overseas Development Institute, The Center for Global Development, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, the Learning Metrics Task citizens, find decent work20 and contribute to sustainable growth and peaceful societies.

x

Strengthening the provision of enabling learning environments. Ensure safe and healthy learning environments, inclusive of safe, disaster-sensitive school buildings and classrooms; the availability of safe and clean drinking water, school feeding programmes, gender-sensitive sanitation and hygiene; and the integration in the curriculum of comprehensive sexual and reproductive health education as well as indigenous knowledge and knowledge relevant to the lives of rural populations.

x

Sustainable financing with a clear commitment by governments and donors to provide the necessary financial resources to achieve educational priorities both in urban and rural contexts.

III.

The way forward

The unfinished business from the MDG and EFA efforts must be acknowledged and addressed, so that countries that have not yet been able to make progress in education (especially in conflict and post-conflict settings) have the chance to establish firm foundations in the primary education for girls and boys. Countries still need an accelerated approach to resolving 'bottlenecks' in advancing quality education through cross-sectoral partnerships that include private sector, trade unions and civil society. Improving the linkages and coherence between education, training and the world of work requires the active participation of employers and workers. School feeding needs to be recognized as an essential pillar of the education system globally, wholly interrelated to the provision of quality education, serving both as a safety net and a complement to other support and services.

The provision of education contributes to progress on a range of development goals, including the eradication of poverty and hunger, the promotion of food security and nutrition, social cohesion, good governance and participatory citizenship and peacebuilding, improved health and gender equality. The SDG agenda must therefore include education as a cross-cutting issue across all development goals, as well as an explicit education goal. Relevant, education must prioritize the acquisition of knowledge, skills and competencies that are linked to 21st century livelihoods and employment, and contribute to shaping attitudes and behaviours that promote social inclusion and cohesion, and environmental sustainability.

These skills and competencies include critical thinking,

T proficiency, conflict resolution, living and learning to

problem solving, effective communication, IC

live together in a multi-cultural world; and relevant content knowledge like nutrition, agricultural, sexual and reproductive health education, environmental and climate change education, disaster risk reduction and preparedness, sustainable consumption and lifestyles, and green technical and vocational education and training. Therefore it is essential that education systems and institutions have the capacity to promote the principles of sustainable development across the learning cycle throughout life, and build resilient and socially-responsible citizens and communities.

The achievement of this vision demands

a single harmonized global education framework,

informed by the successes and challenges of the MDG and EFA agendas. In keeping with the spirit of the summary of outcomes from the ongoing Global Thematic Consultation on Education in the post-2015 Development Agenda, the overarching explicit education goal of "Equitable Quality Education and Lifelong Learning for All" is endorsed. The recommendation is to develop specific goals, indicators and targets around the following four priority areas:

1) All girls and boys are able to access and complete quality pre-primary education of an agreed period (at least 1 year);

2) Equal access to and completion of a full course of quality primary schooling, with recognized and measurable learning outcomes, especially in literacy and numeracy; 3) All adolescent girls and boys access and complete quality lower secondary/secondary education with recognized and measurable learning outcomes; 4) All youth and adults, particularly girls and women, access post-secondary learning opportunities for developing knowledge and skills, including technical and vocational, that are relevant to the worlds of work and life and necessary for further learning and forging more just, peaceful, tolerant and inclusive societies.

Global and national targets should be set for each of the above areas, with due attention to vulnerable groups in order to address inequalities and discrimination and disaggregated by gender, wealth, ethnicity, location, etc. While goals should be relevant to all countries, target-setting at the national/local level should remain flexible so as to allow for the diversity of social, economic and cultural contexts.

Appropriate governance and accountability mechanisms are needed both globally and at country levels to prioritize transparent, well-functioning, effective, and accountable education systems which are capable of delivering high-quality education to all. The meaningful participation of key actors, in particular girls and women, is essential to implement and track an education agenda under the SDG and to uphold the principle of mutual accountability - of education Ministries and other partner Ministries to citizens, donors to national governments, schools to parents, and teachers to students and vice-versa. All partnerships should be explicitly strengthened or designed to address inequalities and their interplay with education progress.

Key questions, among others, to keep in mind going forward include:

x How might education fit within the post-2015 agenda framework to prioritize poverty reduction, food security and human development, whilst covering the broader range of sustainability issues?

x What should the architecture for delivering on education goals within the broader sustainable goals look like, given the existence of education MDGs alongside EFA?

x How can goals and targets be framed in order to foster and capture the cognitive, social, and emotional strengths of students as well as the relevance and resiliency of education systems?

x What kind of disaggregated targets and indicators can we use to realize principles of equality and non-discrimination in education?

CULTURE

I.

Stocktaking

There has been a growing interest and support to recognize culture as an integral part of the broader development debate. Culture should be regarded as the set of distinctive spiritual, material, intellectual and emotional features of society or a social group, and encompasses, in addition to art and literature, lifestyles, ways of living together, value systems, traditions and beliefs.21 Culture shapes individual's worldviews and the way communities address the changes and challenges of their societies. For this reason, education serves as a critical vehicle for transmitting these value systems as well as for learning from the humanity's diversity of worldviews, and for inspiring future creativity and innovation.

The close nexus between education and culture should be understood as an opportunity to promote human rights, including cultural rights, global citizenship and respect for cultural diversity. A rights-based approach to culture is the soil in which education must grow and, through education, flourish and further develop, helping young generations to learn about themselves and others. Cultures are dynamic and evolving: a rights-based education offers opportunities to challenge negative cultural norms or stereotypes, especially those related to gender and race for example, in a culturally-sensitive manner by provoking dialogue, raising awareness and providing alternative models. It is a framework to build truly sustainable development, drawing from the experiences of past generations and serving as a wellspring for creativity and renewal.

At the international level, the Outcome Document of the 2010 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) Summit, adopted ten years after the Millennium Declaration, emphasized the importance of culture for development and its contribution to the achievement of the MDGs. These crucial messages were reiterated in two consecutive Resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly on "Culture and Development" in 2011 (65/166) and 2012 (66/208), which called for the mainstreaming of culture into development policies and strategies, and underscored culture's intrinsic contribution to sustainable development, as well as a number of other relevant declarations, statements and normative instruments adopted at international, regional and national levels. In addition, the outcome document of the UN Conference on Sustainable Development held in Rio de Janeiro in June 2012 (Rio + 20), "The Future We Want", included a number of important references to culture and highlighted the importance of cultural diversity and the need for a more holistic and integrated approach to sustainable development.22

The UNESCO International Congress "Culture: Key to Sustainable Development" (Hangzhou, China, 15-17 May 2013), recommended that a specific Goal focused on culture be included as part of the post-2015 UN development agenda, to be based on heritage, diversity, creativity and the transmission of knowledge and including clear targets and indicators that relate culture to all dimensions of sustainable development.23

There is a legacy of UN engagement on diverse features and facets of culture, which has resulted in some critical tools for analysis, programming and evaluation of human development initiatives and humanitarian interventions.24

At the national level, the UN system has piloted in recent years a range of innovative interagency programmes to support Member States in their efforts to safeguarding cultural and natural heritage, to foster cultural institutions, to strengthen cultural and creative

22 The document recognized, for example, that "many people, especially the poor, depend directly on

ecosystems for their livelihoods, their economic, social and physical well-being, and their cultural heritage" (Para. 30) and that "all cultures and civilizations can contribute to sustainable development" (Para. 41). It also stressed "the need for conservation as appropriate of the natural and cultural heritage of human settlements, the revitalization of historic districts, and the rehabilitation of city centers" (Para. 134), and emphasized the "intrinsic value of biological diversity, as well as its ecological, genetic, social, economic,

A number of countries have assessed the inclusive and multidimensional role of culture in their national development processes through the UNESCO Indicators on Culture for Development (CDIS)1, leading to the production of new facts and figures which illuminate the inclusive role of culture for development at the national level, both as a driver and an enabler, and offer a global overview of national challenges and opportunities for sustaining and enhancing cultural assets, resources and process from a development perspective.

industries, and to promote cultural tourism and the culture sector in general. A total of 18 UN interagency joint programmes on culture and development have thus been implemented under the MDG Achievement Fund in 2008-2013.25 In addition, several culturally-driven development programmes, which insisted on enabling creative partnerships with cultural agents of change have been a feature of over 100 UN Country Development Frameworks.26 Whereas five years ago culture was mentioned in less than 30% of United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks (UNDAFs) at country level, it is now mentioned in 70% of them27. The UN Secretary-General's 2011 report on Culture and Development, moreover, underscored the work being undertaken on a daily basis by 15 United Nations entities, which already includes a culture-sensitive approach.

At the same time, efforts were continued at the global and regional levels to encourage respect for cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue, as key pillars for peace, reconciliation and human rights.

II.

Overview of proposals

Building on an increasing recognition at both international and national levels and on the need expressed in recent years to broaden the development debate, it has emerged that the future development framework for post-2015 should acknowledge the role of culture as an enabler and a driver of sustainable development:

x Culture is a fundamental enabler of sustainable development, being a source of meaning and energy, a wellspring of creativity and innovation, and a resource to address challenges and find appropriate solutions.

x Culture is a driver for sustainable development, through the specific contributions of the culture sector to inclusive social, cultural and economic development, harmony, environmental sustainability, peace and security. One size does not fit all. Different cultural perspectives will result in different paths to development.

III.

The way forward

Culture should be placed at the heart of the Post-2015 Agenda, ideally through a specific goal focused on culture, including development objectives, clear targets and indicators that relate culture to all dimensions of sustainable development.

Building on the recommendation formulated by the International Congress of Hangzhou (15-17 May 2013), development objectives linked to culture are based on the need to:

x

Integrate culture within all development policies and programmes in line with international normative instruments

Development is shaped by culture and local context, which ultimately also determine its outcomes. For this reason, the cultural dimension should be systematically integrated in definitions of sustainable development and well-being, as well as in the conception, measurement and actual practice of development policies and programmes.

x

Build on culture as a resource to address each of the dimensions of sustainable development, from a social, economic and environmental perspective, as well as to foster peace and reconciliation.

o Ensure cultural rights for all to promote

inclusive social development

25 Detailed information on results and impact of the MDG-F Culture and Development Joint Programmes are

Guaranteeing cultural rights, access to cultural goods and services, free participation in cultural life, and freedom of artistic expression are critical to forging inclusive and equitable societies.

o Leverage culture and partnerships with cultural agents for poverty reduction and inclusive economic development

Culture, as knowledge capital and as a resource, provides for the needs of individuals and communities and reduces poverty. The capabilities of culture to provide opportunities for jobs and incomes should be enhanced, targeting in particular women and youth.

o Build on culture to promote

environmental sustainability

Access to essential environmental goods and services for the livelihood of communities should be secured through the stronger protection and more sustainable use of biological and cultural diversity, as well as by the safeguarding of relevant traditional knowledge (including knowledge specific to indigenous peoples' communities and to different gender groups) and skills in synergy with other forms of scientific knowledge.

o Mobilize culture and mutual understanding to foster

peace and reconciliation

In the context of globalization, and in the face of the identity challenges and tensions it can create, intercultural dialogue and the recognition of and respect for cultural diversity can forge more inclusive, stable and resilient societies.

Based on the above objectives, specific targets and indicators should be developed for inclusion within the Post-2015 Agenda, taking into account the following priority areas:

1) The need to strengthen normative, policy and institutional frameworks to support culture 2) The contribution of cultural and creative activities to economic growth and employment 3) Education and training systems to strengthen the role of culture and creativity in society 4) The protection, promotion and transmission of heritage

It will therefore be necessary to foster innovative and sustainable models of cooperation.

Issues Brief 10: HEALTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

1

Introduction: Health as central to sustainable development

The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights states that, "the enjoyment of the highest standards of health is one of the fundamental rights of every human being without distinction of race, religion, political belief, economic or social condition". The full enjoyment of the right to health is critical for the enjoyment of other human rights. Good health is thus an end in itself and it plays an integral role in human capabilities and well-being.

Health is central to the three dimensions of sustainable development. Health is a beneficiary of and a contributor to development. It is also a key indicator of what people-centred, rights-based, inclusive, and equitable development seeks to achieve2. Health is important as an end in itself and as an integral part of human well-being, which includes material, psychological, social, cultural, educational, work, environmental, political, and personal security dimensions. These dimensions of well-being are interrelated and interdependent. Investments in health, particularly prevention of ill health, enhance a country's economic output through their effects on educational achievement and skills acquisition, labour productivity and decent employment, increased savings and investment, the

demographic transition and impacts on the earth's ecosystem3. For these reasons, three of the eight MDGs are focussed on health, and the rest are key determinants of it.

Yet, ill health remains a significant cause, and a consequence of poverty in all countries. Ill health limits productivity and school attendance, thereby preventing many poor people from escaping poverty. Every year 100 million people are either pushed into poverty by health-care costs, including out-of-pocket expenses for health care, or unable to afford essential health services so that preexisting sickness is aggravated. The ability to enjoy the rights to work and education, which are, in turn, essential to the enjoyment of an adequate standard of living, is determined by health. At the same time, poverty-related structural disadvantages such as lack of clean water, sanitation and decent work, hinder the prevention and fuel the spread of diseases. Countless people, particularly those with social disadvantages and marginalized and vulnerable populations, face steep economic, environmental, and social barriers to healthy living on a daily basis.

Also, human health relies on ecosystem health. Protecting and improving ecosystems can be an effective means of permanent control over vector-borne diseases, and maintaining biodiversity will maintain the source of traditional and western medicines.

Development policies and programmes can enhance or undermine both individual and population health, by influencing the social, environmental, economic, cultural and political determinants of health, including occupational health. In order to protect and promote public health, it is therefore essential to consider the health implications of policies and programmes in all sectors, for example energy, transport, agriculture, and as part of broader policies concerning labour rights, trade liberalization, intellectual property and environmental protection, among others. Health can therefore serve as an indicator4 of whether development and sector policies benefit individuals and

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is cochaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. The following TST members contributed to the preparation of this brief: WHO, UNFPA, UNAIDS, UN Women, UNICEF, WMO, UNDP, ILO, PBSO, CBD.

2 World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, the Government of Sweden and the Government of Botswana their families in ways that are tangible and easily understood. Careful selection of health indicators can also help identify and strengthen synergies among sector policies, human rights protection and human development investments. The achievement of health goals requires policy coherence and shared solutions across multiple sectors: that is, a whole-of-government or health in all policies approach5.

I. Stocktaking: lessons from the MDGs, emerging challenges and opportunities

Lessons from work on the MDGs

Adoption of and work toward the health Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have raised the profile of global health to the highest political level, helped to mobilize civil society, increased some national budgets as well as overall development assistance for health, and contributed to noteworthy improvements in health outcomes in low- and middle-income countries. Globally, the number of deaths of children under-five years of age fell from 12 million in 1990 to 6.9 million in 2011. The proportion of births attended by a skilled health worker has increased globally, and the number of maternal deaths was reduced from an estimated 543,000 in 1990 to 287,000 in 2010. Over the past decade, global new HIV infections declined by 24% and malaria mortality rates decreased by more than 25% globally and by more than 33% in African. Finally, global mortality due to TB has fallen 41% since 1990.6

Lesson: Significant progress can be made on seemingly intractable health problems with political support, strategic investments and people-centered policies and programmes.

Despite such progress, much remains to be done to achieve the health MDGs. In 2011, about 19,000 children under age of five died every day from preventable causes with deaths in the immediate period after birth accounting for 43 per cent of all child deaths. Every day in 2010, approximately 800 women died from preventable causes related to pregnancy and childbirth. An estimated 222 million women, mostly in low and middle income countries, who do not want to become pregnant lack access to modern contraception. Every day an estimated 7,000 people in low- and middle-income countries are newly infected with HIV, including 1,000 newborns, and 40 per cent of new infections are in young people ages 15-24. Only 54 per cent of people in need of HIV treatment are able to access it. An estimated 219 million cases and 660,000 deaths occurred from malaria in 2010. In 2011, an estimated 8.7 million new cases and 1.4 million deaths resulted from tuberculosis.7 Violence causes half a million deaths annually.8

Many of these challenges reflect persistent inequities, within and among countries, in access to health information and services. For example, maternal mortality ratios (MMR)9 show that developing regions, on average, have a MMR (240 deaths per 100,000 live births) 15 times higher than that of developed regions (16 deaths per 100,000 live births). Eighteen of 26 countries with the largest decreases in under-5 mortality have also seen a simultaneous widening of the mortality gap between the poorest and richest 20 per cent of their populations.10

Health patterns and priorities also vary within and across regions and countries. For example, children's health, women's and adolescents' sexual and reproductive health, HIV and AIDS, and other infectious diseases continue to be dominant priorities in sub-Saharan Africa, in fragile states

5Health in the Post 2015 agenda, Final Report of the Health Thematic Consultation (April 2013), page 8 6 Above, note 5, page 23

7 Health in the post 2015 Agenda: Report of the Global Thematic Consultation on Health", World Health outside of Africa, and among the poor and other disadvantaged groups in many other countries including higher income countries. For high-and middle-income countries, the most important risk factors are those associated with non-communicable diseases (NCDs).

Lesson: Achieving equity, equality and eliminating discrimination in health requires strategic goal and target-setting and sound implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting systems. The unfinished health MDGs must remain health priorities in the post 2015 period.

The MDGs did not fully address the broader concept of development enshrined in the Millennium Declaration, which includes human rights, equity, democracy, and governance. The MDGs have also contributed to fragmented approaches to development: among the different health MDGs; between the health MDGs and other MDGs, such as gender equality or environment; and between the MDGs and priorities omitted from the MDG agenda. Neither have the MDGs addressed the enormous challenge to development posed by NCDs.

Lesson: Further progress in improving health and well-being will require reducing health inequities not only through health system strengthening and financial protection but also through integrated approaches for health and other SDGs.

Emerging Challenges

Continued progress toward the health MDGs faces at least four significant challenges. The first is major shifts in the age structures of countries, such that the lower income countries have unprecedented numbers of people, and proportions of their populations, under age 24. With appropriate investments these young people can be a vital resource for development, a "demographic dividend". In contrast, population aging is a feature in high and middle income countries which will increase over the next decades.

Aging, combined with unsustainable patterns of consumption and lifestyle, is leading to a massive increase in the burden of NCDs, including heart and chronic respiratory disease, strokes and diabetes. NCDs accounted for 34.5 million deaths a year in 2010, 80% of which were in middle and low income countries. NCD-related mortality is expected to increase by 50% by 2030, with the largest increase in Sub Saharan Africa and South Asia. This is one of the foremost challenges to sustainable development in the 21st century.

All countries will need to develop effective ways to prevent and end tobacco use, misuse of alcohol and other substances, obesity and physical inactivity as well as unsafe sex and endemic violence against women and girls, mental health problems and occupational diseases.

These health issues require health policies, programmes and services to give far more attention to the young, especially adolescents; develop more effective and participatory approaches to prevention of health risks; empower adults, especially older people, to manage chronic diseases; and strengthen health systems, and national and global strategies and policies, to prevent and manage both communicable and non-communicable diseases and conditions simultaneously.

The second challenge is that all countries need to develop capacities and to think creatively and innovatively to deliver health and wellness not only for each of the life stages, but also for every person throughout life, regardless of the socio-economic, health, gender, and other status of that person, a new way of acting in the health sector.

The third challenge is that new diseases frequently appear, for example SARS, or the newer H7N9 virus. These increasingly spread globally, and will require continuing development, maintenance, and prioritization of national and global public health institutions, data collection, analysis and technical capabilities. These and other diseases and conditions such as disability (15 percent of the world population lives with disability) and multiple health problems in one person ("co-morbidities") require increased research capacity, R and D for new drugs and devices, and prevention strategies.

The fourth challenge is that vast

populations are moving to urban areas

and face a lack of infrastructure and services. One-third of the world's urban population and over 60% of city dwellers in Sub Saharan Africa and South Asia live in slums, and are exposed to a large number of environmental and social risks to health such as indoor and outdoor air pollution, crowding, lack of water and sanitation, and poor working conditions. Production and consumption patterns that generate NCDs also create local environmental damage and global climate change which affects the health of generations to come. Air pollution alone is estimated to cause several million preventable deaths each year, as well as to cause short and long term climate change impacts11. Estimates suggest that one-quarter of the global burden of disease can be attributed to environmental risks, including climate change.

Lesson: There are many opportunities for health and development that have not been explored. A better nexus between health and other possible SDGs such as on sustainable energy and transport, could address some of the key challenges, from NCDs to climate change. Health systems will need to be strengthened to respond to increasing expectations and shifting epidemiological, demographic, and a wide range of environmental and social risk factors. Health financing strategies are needed to ensure equal access for all, and to provide protection against catastrophic health expenditures by individuals and ruinous costs to national economies.

Opportunities

Increasingly, new and improved technologies, national, regional and global connectivity, and citizens' participation in health policy development and implementation and in quality assurance and accountability mechanisms in health and other sectors, offer significant opportunities to meet the challenges outlined above. A post-2015 agenda grounded in human rights and focused on equity, equality and non-discrimination would provide a rallying point and tool for civil society, especially the 1.8 billion young people acting in their own right and for the wellbeing of others. A development agenda designed to maximize the synergies among sectors will help ameliorate both financial and natural resource constraints.

Clean and sustainable home energy solutions exist to reduce indoor air pollution, and have additional benefits such as reduced burns and scalds, and reduced cooking time, which frees girls to go to school and women to engage in economic activities. Promoting sustainable transport, based on rapid transit, cycling and walking, along with compact cities, will increase physical activity and help reduce outdoor air pollution, traffic injuries, obesity and heart disease. New technologies such as tele-epidemiology are useful to remotely monitor environmental factors and help in predicting epidemic risks. Also, the role of chemicals and their contribution to improve living standards needs to be balanced with recognition of their potential adverse impacts on the environment and human health.

II. Overview of proposals: Health at the heart of the SDGs

Principles

The wide-ranging consultations on health in the post 2015 agenda yielded consensus around six principles for defining goals, targets and indicators:

x Universal relevance. Large numbers of people in every country are affected by the health issues reviewed above, including both those addressed by the health MDGs and those that are emerging. Many people in almost every country lack the financial means, nutrition, knowledge and information, medicines and care to prevent, treat, or cope with ill health. The post-2015 health agenda must be designed to improve the health of those who are disadvantaged in every country, including in conflict affected areas, and to protect human rights, while recognizing that countries' priorities may vary according to the demographic profile and health circumstances of each country.

x Crosscutting attention to equity, equality and non-discrimination. The most disadvantaged, marginalized, stigmatized, and hard-to-reach populations in all countries should be prioritized. Explicit targets should be included to significantly reduce socioeconomic, gender, age and other forms of inequity as a matter of priority. Achieving equity and equality requires focussed attention not only on inclusion of disadvantaged groups of people such as women, adolescents, elderly, ethnic minorities and migrants, but also to their differentiated health needs.

x Participation, accountability and access to information. Communities and civil society should be meaningfully involved in developing, implementing and monitoring progress towards attainment of the health goals and targets. Strengthening national health information systems, civil registration and vital statistics, down to the district level and below, is an essential prerequisite for measuring and improving equity and equality. Access to information is vital for people, especially for the marginalized groups, in order to take decisions, access health programmes and hold decision-makers accountable.

x Country specificity and global relevance. Countries should develop targets relative to their own baselines and include indicators based on their priority health needs, relevant health determinants and outcomes. A common set of indicators to be used and reported regularly by all countries should also be agreed to enable tracing of progress globally and also across countries and regions.

x Synergies with other goals and with sustainable development goals overall. Positive synergies between health and the other sectors, and avoidance of contradictions among sector goals and strategies, might be achieved by framing the goals in such a way that attainment requires policy coherence and shared solutions across multiple sectors. Potential risks to health generated by other sectors, such as pollution, climate change, loss of biodiversity and patterns of consumption and production, should be considered early in the process of designing possible goals and targets for these sectors. The same should be done to maximize positive synergies such as those between health and education, especially of girls, or health and social protection schemes. Health metrics should be used to measure outcomes of SDGs.12 Given the contribution of health to sustainable development, and the critical importance of the multi-sector determinants of health, a "health-in-all-policies" approach could be adopted. This approach would recognize that health-related targets be included under other sector goals. This approach could encourage integration of health risk reduction and health promotion in all stages of life into the framing of overall development policies and thinking. Norms and standards, operations research, documentation and sharing of good practice, evidence-based policy guidance and enhanced management competence and capacity would all be needed to sustain such an effort.

x Sustainability. The health of future generations should be protected, by providing them with skills and education, by bequeathing a clean and biodiverse environment and preventing health risks from climate change and other long-term environmental threats.

x Human rights and gender equality. The framing of goals, targets and indicators for health must be compatible with protection and fulfilment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, including gender equality. A human rights-based approach would buttress the complementarity between post-2015 commitments and existing international obligations. It would also ensure the systematic integration of human rights standards and principles in health sector interventions.

Proposed goals and targets

During the consultation process, consensus emerged around the following key points:

x The guiding principles for the new development agenda should include human rights, equity, gender equality, accountability, and sustainability.

x The most disadvantaged, marginalized, stigmatized, and hard-to-reach populations in all countries should be prioritized. Equity can be made explicit in all the goals by disaggregating indicators and targets at all levels, and including targets for closing gaps.

x The post-2015 health agenda should: 1) include specific health-related targets as part of other development sector goals; 2) take a holistic, life-course approach to people's health with an emphasis on health promotion and disease prevention; 3) accelerate progress where MDG targets have not been achieved and set more ambitious targets for the period to come; and 4) address the growing burden of NCDs, mental illness, violence, and other emerging health challenges. Sexual and reproductive health and rights must be addressed, and young people require special attention, including comprehensive sexuality education, as well as protection from sexual violence and abuse.

Discussions at the March 2013 High Level Dialogue on Health resulted in the following suggestions for the framing of goals and targets in the post 2015 Agenda:

x Maximizing healthy lives could be the specific health goal, in which the health sector would play a larger but far from exclusive role. This goal can be achieved by accelerating the health MDG agenda; reducing the burden of NCDs; ensuring universal health coverage and access; and improving determinants of health through inter-sectoral action and development policies. Achieving better health at all stages of life (childhood, adolescence, reproductive age, older ages) is a goal that is relevant for every country. Interventions from all sectors of society will be required.

x Accelerating progress on the health MDG agenda should build on national and global efforts that have already resulted in significant progress in reducing child and maternal deaths and controlling HIV, tuberculosis, malaria, and neglected tropical diseases. The new agenda should be even more ambitious, and reaffirm the targets of ongoing initiatives such as: ending preventable maternal and child deaths; eliminating chronic malnutrition and malaria; providing universal access to sexual and reproductive health services, including family planning; protecting women's and adolescents' reproductive rights; increasing immunization coverage; eliminating violence against women and girls, including sexual violence and abuse and realizing the vision of an AIDS- and tuberculosis-free generation.

x Reducing the burden of major NCDs requires focusing on prevention of the main risk factors (tobacco use, misuse of alcohol and other substances, obesity and physical inactivity) for cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases, and diabetes (the four NCDs causing the most deaths), and mental illness. Some targets could be based on the World Health Assembly resolution of a 25% reduction of deaths due to these four NCDs by 2025. Other targets could be aimed at prevention by reducing the main risk factors, as well morbidity and disability from NCDs and mental illness at all ages.

x Ensuring universal health coverage and access is suggested as the central contribution by the health sector to achieving health goals and targets. Providing all people with access to affordable, comprehensive, and high-quality services that address basic health requirements and country health priorities is essential to achieve better health outcomes. It is also a desirable goal because people value the security and protection that derives from it. Universal health coverage and access should include the whole continuum of care, especially at the primary health care level (promotion of health, prevention of ill health, treatment, rehabilitation, and palliation) through all stages of life.

x Taking action on the social and environmental determinants of health13 through cooperation with other sectors and inclusion of health-related indicators to monitor progress towards achieving other sector's goals. For example, departments of health and agriculture could collaborate to develop sustainable food systems that enable access to a balanced diet and can be monitored by levels of stunting and of obesity; tele-epidemiology technologies could monitor factors affecting health; a sustainable energy for all goal could measure progress by deaths and diseases attributed to air-pollution. Health indicators such as these track not only progress towards achieving the goals but also related benefits to individuals and population groups. Such feedback also helps identify needed adjustment to the policies to avoid costs to society and permit greater health protection.

The report of the High-level Panel on the Post-2015 Development Agenda14 reflects in many ways the above suggestions. 'Ensure Healthy Lives' was proposed as an illustrative goal for health. It includes the following health related targets: end preventable infant and under-5 deaths; increase the proportion of children, adolescents, at-risk adults and older people that are fully vaccinated; decrease the maternal mortality ratio; ensure universal sexual and reproductive health and rights; reduce the burden of disease from HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, neglected tropical diseases and priority non-communicable diseases. The High-level Panel's proposal does not provide targets for universal health coverage and NCD risks, or explicitly address health determinants - areas which found significant support in the health consultation process.

III. The way forward

Prioritizing a global health goal is essential for sustainable development as indicated above. It is imperative that the health sector address its weaknesses, not least of which are poor governance and weak accountability mechanisms; low status compared to other sectors in the view of finance and planning ministries; serious shortages of well-trained, motivated and supported health workers and unfair distribution of them within and across countries; and lack of knowledge or capability in many key areas such as quality assurance. In the face of such challenges, continuing progress depends, to an important extent, on empowering communities and people as the agents for their own health and as advocates with government.

Long-term, predictable, and sustainable financing for health, from domestic as well as international resources, is required just to provide an irreducible minimum of preventative and curative health services and capacity building in the sector. The post-2015 framework offers an opportunity to generate innovative financing mechanisms, while also reducing inefficiencies and wastage in the sector. In these circumstances, it is important that the global health architecture evolve in order to better respond to countries' needs and priorities and to play a fully effective role in achieving health for all.

Issues Brief 11: POPULATION DYNAMICS

1

I. Stocktaking

The discourse on population dynamics

Today population trends are characterized by an increasing divergence between countries. Whereas the least developed countries continue to see high population growth, developing countries that are more advanced in their demographic transition are witnessing rapid population aging and even population decline in some cases. Furthermore, many countries continue to see a high rate of urbanization and increasingly complex internal and international migration patterns. These population dynamics influence development at national and sub-national levels, but also at regional and global levels.

Echoing the Rio Declaration (principle 8) agreed at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 1992 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, the Programme of Action (principle 6) of the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) held in 1994 in Cairo, Egypt, emphasizes two critical elements for sustainable development: The need for sustainable patterns of production and consumption - which is the hallmark of the green economy - and the need to address population dynamics.

The United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, Rio+20, reaffirmed the important linkages between sustainable development and population dynamics. Population dynamics and related population issues were emphasized in the outcome document of Rio+20 "The Future We Want":

"We acknowledge that with the world's population projected to exceed 9 billion by 2050, with an estimated two thirds living in cities, we need to increase our efforts to achieve sustainable development and, in particular, the eradication of poverty, hunger and preventable diseases" (The Future We Want, paragraph 21).

"We commit to systematically consider population trends and projections in our national, rural and urban development strategies and policies. Through forward-looking planning, we can seize the opportunities and address the challenges associated with demographic change, including migration" (The Future We Want, paragraph 144).

The United Nations Task Team Report "Realizing the Future We Want for All" states: "[Development] Targets should take proper account of population dynamics and different demographic structures across countries and regions and within countries. The clearest expression of these is the changing weights of youth and older persons in societies; different rates of fertility, morbidity and mortality; and urbanization rates. A combination of absolute and relative targets will be needed for an all-inclusive development agenda that takes shifting demographics into account" (paragraph 115).

The increasing emphasis on population dynamics in international debates and conferences, as well as intergovernmental and interagency processes, is mirrored by increasing concerns about population dynamics at the national level. The last review of the United Nations Population Division shows for example that more than 80 per cent of the governments of least developed countries consider their fertility and population growth rates as too high, and 75 per cent desire a major

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is cochaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. The issues brief was prepared by UNFPA, UNDESA, UN Habitat, IOM, ILO, OHCHR, UN Women, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNECLAC, UNEP, UNESCAP, UNICEF, WFP and WMO.

change in the spatial distribution of their population. By contrast, a large majority of developed countries and a growing proportion of developing countries have major concerns about population aging.

Against this background population dynamics became one of eleven major themes that were considered of particular relevance for the consultations on the post-2015 development agenda and sustainable development goals. This consultation put forward two overarching messages:

1. Demography matters for sustainable development. Population dynamics shape the key developmental challenges that the world is confronting in the 21st century, and in return are shaped by macroeconomic, social, and environmental policies; and they must be addressed in the post-2015 development agenda.

2. Demography is not destiny. Population dynamics are the result of individual choices and opportunities, and they must be addressed by enlarging, not restricting, individual choices and opportunities. All stakeholders in this discussion made it very clear that we must address and harness population dynamics for development, and that we must do so through human rights-based and gender-responsive policies.

This report provides an overview of the discussion on the role of population dynamics- changes in the size, age structure and location of populations - in the post-2015 development agenda and sustainable development goals to date. It highlights principle linkages between human wellbeing, population dynamics and sustainable development, underlines the importance of rights-based and gender-responsive policies in addressing population dynamics, and concludes with concrete recommendations on how to incorporate population issues in the new development agenda.

The linkages between human wellbeing, population dynamics and sustainable development

Sustainable development is about people, and must take account of people. Meeting the needs of current and future generations requires knowledge of how many people are living on the planet and how many will be added to the planet in the next decades; of how old these people are and how the age distribution will change in the future, and of where people are living today and where they will be living in a few years from now. The systematic consideration of population dynamics is essential for the formulation of sustainable development strategies, goals, targets, policies and programmes.

However, the systematic consideration of population data and projections is not only important to improve the provision of goods and services -- ranging from infrastructure to housing, and health and education - but also because population dynamics have far-reaching implications for social, economic and environmental development more generally. Population growth and population aging, as well as migration and urbanization affect virtually all development objectives. They affect consumption, production, employment, income distribution, poverty and social protection, including pensions; and they raise the stakes in our efforts to ensure universal access to health, education, housing, sanitation, water, food and energy. Furthermore, efforts to reduce poverty and improve living conditions for a large and growing world population will place mounting pressures on the planet's finite resources, challenging environmental sustainability, and contributing to climate change and natural disasters.

The greatest challenge today is to meet the needs of a large and growing population, while ensuring the sustainability of the natural environment. The world population has surpassed the 7 billion mark and it would have grown to over 9 billion before the middle of this century. To feed a world population of 9 billion will poses a significant challenge. It will require not only a large increase in agricultural output and productivity, but also a more sustainable agricultural production. However, more people will not only need more and more nutritious food, they will also need many other essential goods and services. The production and provision of all goods and services will require the transformation of all natural resources and have a growing impact on water, forests, land and the climate. To address these challenges depends not only on how economic resources are distributed but also on how they are produced. Countries will need to actively promote sustainable patterns of consumption and production, and ensure more inclusive and greener economic growth. Business as usual would result in an increasing frequency and intensity of natural disasters and is not an option.

But population dynamics not only pose challenges, they also provide important opportunities for more sustainable development pathways. A fall in fertility levels and slower population growth can enable countries to reap a demographic dividend resulting from demographic transitions and jumpstart economic development. Migration can be an important enabler of social and economic development and allows people to respond to changes in social, economic and environmental conditions. And through integrated rural-urban planning and by strengthening urban-rural linkages, rural and urban transformation can be a powerful driver of sustainable development.

II. Overview of proposals

The imperative of human rights-based and gender-responsive policies

Whether population dynamics pose challenges or provide opportunities largely depends on the policies that are put in place today. These policies should be formulated and carried out with full respect of fundamental human rights and freedoms.2

Whether the world population will indeed grow to about 9.3 billion by the middle of the century and level off at about 10 billion by the end of it - the "medium" variant of the United Nations population projection -- or whether it will grow closer to 10.6 billion by the middle of the century and reach about 16 billion - the "high" variant of this projection -- depends on policies and behavioral change starting today. Both variants assume a drop in fertility from current levels. The difference between the medium and the high variants is the result of half a child per woman difference in the time trajectory of fertility.

Promoting universal access to sexual and reproductive health and rights, including voluntary family planning, and access to education, including comprehensive sexuality education, can make a world of difference for people and societies. Together these measures help to avoid unwanted pregnancies, reduce teenage pregnancies, curb gender-based violence and reduce abortions, which often claim lives if undertaken in an unsafe environment; and they also reduce infant, child and maternal mortality and help to combat HIV/ AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases, which continue to claim millions of lives every year. Furthermore, they help to reduce the financial burden of disease, which frequently leads to unsustainable household expenditures and debt, and they enable women and men to share and better balance family care and work, which can positively

2 In accordance, the outcome documents of the global consultation on population dynamics emphasize rights-

based and gender-responsive policies to address and harness population dynamics, and to this end the outcome documents reaffirmed the Cairo Programme of Action adopted at the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) in 1994; the Beijing Platform for Action adopted at the United Nations Conference on Women in 1995; the Programme of Action adopted at the HABITAT (1995); the United Nations Millennium Declaration (2000); the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing (2002); the Chair's Conclusion on the UN High-level Dialogue on Migration (2006); the outcome report of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (2012); the report by the United Nations System Task Team on the Post-2015 Development Agenda; as well as the subsequent reviews and key actions for further implementation of these intergovernmental agreements.

affect their labor force participation and household incomes. These effects at the household level, together with fall in fertility and a deceleration of population growth at the macro level, make important contributions to poverty reduction, as well as social, economic and environmental sustainability.

Right-based and gender-responsive policies are also critical in a context of low fertility and population ageing. Policies addressing low fertility should promote a better work-life balance, and should ensure access to essential services, such as child care and social protection. Progress in these areas would eliminate important reasons why families are hesitant to have a larger number of children. Furthermore, non-discriminatory policies are important to allow older persons to fully contribute to society while at the same time receiving the care, services and social protection they need. Fiscal policies, social protection and non-financial support systems for families along these lines can influence decisions about family size. Similarly, rural and urban planning, infrastructure, building standards, and the classification and management of land, can encourage more sustainable settlement patterns, and the integration of migrants into their host communities. A human rights-based approach is also crucial in migration policies, which should be formulated in full respect and protection of migrant's rights and fundamental freedoms.

Four priority areas for action

To address and harness population dynamics, the global discussion on population dynamics has emphasized action in the following broad areas:

1.

Invest in human capital throughout the life course to realize the dividends of demographic transitions. Whether countries are able to seize the benefits that are associated with deceleration of population growth, as well as the benefits that can come with an aging population, depends on investment in human capital throughout the life course.

In a world of 7 billion there are currently about 1.8 billion young men and women in the age-range of 10-24 years. Young people represent hopes and aspirations for the future. This is true in the world's least developed countries, which have a large and growing youth population, as well as more advanced countries, which have an increasingly older population. Whatever the demographic specificities of countries, young people are expected to make productive contributions to societies, get a decent job, pay taxes, and contribute to social protection systems. Yet, there often is a significant gap between expectations of young people and the realities confronted by them. Many do not benefit from adequate investment in health and education, including technical and vocational skills; many are unable to find productive and remunerative employment and decent work; and many therefore continue to dependent on public and private support mechanisms even in their most productive ages.

Investment in young people is not only an economic and social necessity but also a moral obligation and must start from an early age and continue throughout the life course. The formation of human capital depends on investment in education beyond the primary level, but it often starts with access to health information and services, including for sexual and reproductive health. A concerted effort is needed to ensure universal access to education, to sexual and reproductive health, and to decent work opportunities in an integrated and coherent way.

While the world population will continue to grow for decades to come, the world population will get older at the same time. Population aging is already well advanced in the developed countries, but it is most rapid in the developing countries. The aging of populations is a positive sign, which is attributable to a reduction in fertility and an increase in life expectancy, but it also comes with important social and economic changes that demand policy responses. To seize the benefits that can come with population aging, countries will need to promote the active and healthy aging of the older persons. This calls for investment in continuing education and lifelong learning; productive investment in the real economy and employment creation; and policies that counter discrimination against older persons. Countries must also strengthen the rights, protection and integration of disabled persons in their societies. Furthermore, nationally-defined social protection floors combining basic income support with access to essential health and social services can provide a coherent approach to empower and protect people over the life course.

2.

Seize the developmental benefits of migration. Migration changes the lives of migrants and has far-reaching implications for communities and countries. More than 214 million people today live outside their countries of origin, and over 760 million are estimated to live in their own countries, outside their regions of origin, making a total of about 1 billion migrants today. The decision to migrate is attributable to the complex interaction of different factors, but most fundamentally it is prompted by the aspiration to improve living conditions. Migration allows people to escape from dire situations (including poverty, disasters, humanitarian crisis, human-rights abuses, armed conflict or forced evictions), and it enables people to look for more promising lives, livelihoods and lifestyles elsewhere (including access to adequate healthcare and education, decent work opportunities, justice and freedom of expression, and to more attractive economic, social, cultural and political environments). Furthermore, migration creates development impacts at both ends of migration corridors. Migration and the resources it generates in the form of diaspora investments, workers' remittances, and knowledge and skills transfers can enhance individual capabilities and human development at the household level- at both origin and destination-but can also contribute to local and national development and bring resilience to economic and environmental risks and shocks.

However, many migrants move to areas where they are more vulnerable to natural hazards than in their home countries. Furthermore, many migrants are still forced to leave their homes or are victims of trafficking, and too many are lacking basic human rights and access to essential services. Vulnerable groups of migrants, such as women, children, adolescents and youth, undocumented migrants, domestic workers, and temporary and low-skilled workers often do not have adequate protection. They often lack labor rights and have limited access to justice, health care, housing and education and to other public services.

While it presents many opportunities, migration remains a considerable governance challenge at the local, national regional and global levels. Today, South-South migration is becoming as important as South-North migration, and many countries are now simultaneously countries of origin, transit and destination. To reap the developmental benefits of migration, countries need to establish comprehensive, balanced and inclusive national policies on migration, and at the same time they will need to strengthen bilateral, regional and global partnerships on migration, based on the principles of non-discrimination, empowerment, participation and accountability. Governments, international organizations, business, trade unions and civil society and the private sector should work together to develop adequate governance structures for migration at different levels, and the workers' and employers' groups should help to identify the gaps and needs in labor markets.

It is essential that countries protect, respect and fulfill the human rights of all migrants, including by assuring the labor rights of migrant workers; reduce the social and economic costs of migration, including by facilitating the transfer of remittances and lowering the costs of such transfers; and take measures to ensure the portability of acquired rights and benefits across borders, including social security schemes.

3.

Create livable and sustainable cities for growing populations. A historic milestone was achieved in 2007 when the global proportion of people living in cities and towns reached the 50 per cent mark. By 2050 this proportion is expected to rise to about 67 per cent. The rapidly increasing dominance of cities places the process of urbanization among the most significant global social transformations of the twenty-first century.

Unplanned urban growth increases vulnerability to natural hazards and can exacerbate urban poverty. Despite increasing attention to improving access to basic services in slums, in absolute terms, the number of slum dwellers in the developing world has risen as urban municipalities have failed to keep up with the rapid pace of generation of new slum areas. Today, many cities are simultaneously dealing with congestion and sprawl.

However, by anticipating urbanization, leveraging the advantages of agglomeration, and managing urban growth as part of their respective development strategies, central governments and local authorities can address the challenges of urban growth. Cities have always been centers for development, innovation and the arts, and if well managed cities make an important contribution to social, economic and environmental sustainability. Higher population density enables governments to more easily deliver essential infrastructure and services in urban areas at relatively low cost per capita. Furthermore, urbanization can produce energy savings, particularly in the housing and transportation sectors. To address the challenge of high population density with deteriorating living conditions, especially in sums, as well as the challenge of urban sprawl, critically depends on infrastructure development, transport nobs, and green spaces.

The success in creating livable and sustainable cities is intrinsically linked to the success in ensuring sustainable rural development. This is true not only for the world's least developed countries, where the rural population will continue to grow for years to come, but also for more advanced countries, where the rural population has begun to stabilize or shrink. To strengthen the linkages between rural and urban areas, through transport networks and other types of infrastructure, is a critical step towards an integrated, balanced and sustainable development of countries.

4.

Collect, analyze and use population data and projections for sustainable development. People-centred development strategies must systematically consider changes in the number, age, location and living conditions of people; and use population data and projections to inform development goals, targets and indicators, as well as policies and programmes. Sex-disaggregated data and gender-sensitive statistics are key to developing and monitoring necessary gender-sensitive policies, budgets and programmes related to population dynamics and sustainable development. While population dynamics can be influenced through a wide range of policies that are put in place today - for example in the area of health, education, employment and social protection, energy, and housing -- these policies will only be effective if they are themselves informed by data on population trends.

Forward-looking development goals and targets need to take a dynamic, rather than static, view of population patterns and trends. Without considering how many people will be living on the planet, where and how they will be living, and how old they are, we cannot hope to meet the needs of people. For example, to set meaningful targets with respect to education in fifteen years from now, it is necessary to consider how many people will enter primary, secondary and tertiary school age over this period. Likewise, countries cannot only focus on meeting the unmet need for family planning of families today, but must simultaneously plan to also meet the needs of all those who enter reproductive age in the coming years. Similarly, targets on employment and social protection, including pensions and health insurance, will be influenced by changes in the labor force and dependency rates over time. In addition to accounting for changes in the size of populations, all targets must account for trends in population mobility - into and out of countries and regions, internally and across borders - and the subsequent spatial distribution of people.

The systematic collection, analysis and use of population data and projections are essential for forward-looking development strategies with longer time horizons, as well as evidence-based policy making and good governance. Population data and projections should therefore inform development strategies at all levels (e.g., national, regional, rural, urban and peri-urban), and of all types (e.g., national strategy, climate change mitigation or adaptation, environmental protection, health care, education, infrastructure).

III. The way forward

To date, all issue briefs prepared by the Technical Support Team for consideration by the Open Working Group underscore the importance of population dynamics.3 The challenge of reducing poverty and promoting human wellbeing, while ensuring the sustainability of the natural environment is inseparably linked to population patterns and trends.

Major changes in population dynamics have implications that go well beyond national borders, and therefore population dynamics are a global responsibility of all countries. The universal nature of population dynamics calls for global partnerships on population issues. Sustainable development goals and the post-2015 development agenda must address and harness population dynamics through rights-based and gender-responsive policies. It can do so by focusing on goals and targets that:

1. Strengthen human capital throughout the life course, with a particular focus on health, including sexual and reproductive health and rights; education, including comprehensive sexuality education; and poverty reduction, including decent work and social protection; as well as a particular emphasis on human rights, non-discrimination, equal opportunities, women's empowerment and youth participation.

2. Develop bilateral, regional and multilateral partnerships on migration, with a focus on ensuring the rights and safety of migrants, combating discrimination against migrants, and a focus on realizing the developmental benefits of migration for sending and receiving countries.

3. Create equitable, livable and sustainable cities that can accommodate increased demands for livelihoods and services, while strengthening the linkages between rural and urban areas, and promoting the sustainable development of the rural communities.

4. Strengthen national capacities to collect, use and analyze population data and projections.

While population dynamics pose challenges in all countries, the least developed countries face particularly significant challenges. They not only have the highest rate of population growth and the most rapid rates of urban population growth; they also witness a rapid increase in migration and are hosting a large number of refugees. At the same, they have limited financial and human resources, as well as weak statistical and institutional capacities, which undermine their ability to plan for and respond to the population dynamics that are unfolding.

The priorities and actions to these ends are summarized in the annexed table.

Make people count: Plan for and address changes in the number, age and location of people

1.

1. Invest in human capital throughout the life course to realize the dividends of demographic transitions

x Fulfill and protect the right to health care for all, including sexual and reproductive health, providing available, accessible, acceptable, and affordable quality information and services.

x Ensure formal and informal education for people at all ages, including life-skills development and comprehensive sexuality education; primary, secondary and tertiary education; technical and vocational training.

x Promote full employment and decent work, in particular for younger generations that are just entering the labor market, women who often find it difficult to balance care-giving and work, and older persons who may wish to remain engaged in economic activities.

x Ensure adequate social protection for people at all ages, with a focus on increasing coverage and providing adequate levels of health care, pensions and social security.

x Eliminate all forms of discrimination, violence and harmful practices, including female genital mutilation and cutting, and early and forced marriages.

2. Promote the developmental benefits of migration

x Promote and protect the fundamental human rights and freedoms of all migrants, irrespective of migration status.

x Mainstream migration into development planning, and strengthen bilateral, regional and global partnerships on migration to ensure safe, regular and orderly processes of migration and reduce barriers to movement.

x Reduce the social and economic costs of the migration.

x Reduce the transaction fees for migrant remittances, and increase possibilities to invest migrant remittances in countries of origin.

x Respect the equal treatment of migrants in terms of employment, wages, working conditions, social protection, including health care.

3. Create livable and sustainable cities for growing population

x Ensure access to essential amenities and services -- land, public space, housing, water, sanitation, energy, health and education -- with special attention to the urban poor and marginalized neighborhoods.

x Strengthen linkages between rural and urban areas and within cities through infrastructure development

including affordable transport networks.

x Minimize cities' environmental impact through limiting urban sprawl and promoting energy efficient/low emissions housing, transport and utilities.

4. Collect, analyze and use population data and projections for development

x Systematically use data, projections and analyses of the size, age, location and movement of people to formulate development goals and plans at the national and sub-national levels and across sectors.

x Systematically use disaggregated data, including by age, sex and location, to identify inequalities and monitor progress towards development objectives.

x Strengthen national and international statistical systems on demographic data, including for the production of projections and capacity building on demographic analysis.

x Significantly increase the collection of demographic data through censuses, surveys, civil registration and administrative records, and promote the use of geo-referenced data.

5. Develop and strengthen partnerships on population issues

x Provide financial and technical assistance to support developing countries, with a focus on least developed countries, in the area of population dynamics.

x Ensure evidence-based policy making, which is informed by population data, projections and analysis.

x Strengthen bilateral, regional and global partnerships to ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and rights, including family planning, and comprehensive sexuality education inside and outside of schools.

x Reinforce and establish bilateral, regional and global partnerships on migration to ensure safe, regular and orderly processes of migration and reduce barriers to movement.

x Reinforce and establish bilateral, regional and global partnerships to foster sustainable urban development, including the collaboration between city authorities, and strengthen rural-urban linkages.

Issues Brief 12: INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINED ECONOMIC GROWTH, INDUSTRIALIZATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT1

I. Stocktaking

Inclusive and Sustained Economic Growth. Economic growth is the increase in the inflation-adjusted value of the goods and services produced by an economy over a given period of time. In general, economic growth is critical for poverty eradication: Between 1990 and 2010 the global economy grew at an average rate of 2.7% per year while the number of people worldwide living on less than US$ 1.25 a day fell from 43% to 21%, to around 1.2 billion people. An expanding economy, however, does not necessarily mean that everyone benefits or benefits equally from the increased prosperity. During approximately the same period, in sub-Saharan Africa, poverty reduction was accompanied by a rise in inequality, with the top 20% of the population increasing their share of income to more than half. OECD countries also saw growing inequality, with the gap between rich and poor reaching its highest level in 30 years, with the average income of the richest 10% of the population reaching about 9 times that of the poorest 10%. Inequality has also increased in a majority of European and Asian transition economies and South Asian and Middle-East and North African (MENA) countries. The Latin American and South-East Asian regions, which had seen large increases in income inequality during 1980-2000, experienced a marked decline in income inequality throughout the first ten years of the new millennium.2

Inclusive Economic Growth: Inclusive growth represents growth that generates decent jobs, gives opportunities for all segments of society, especially socially excluded groups, and distributes the income and non-income gains from prosperity more equally across society.3 Besides contributing to human dignity and social cohesion, addressing rising inequality is growth enhancing inter alia through improvements in workforce education, skills and health. Economic growth continues to be necessary for prosperity but has to be inclusive to ensure the well-being of the entire population. Inclusive growth, while requiring poverty reduction, is a broader concept that also focuses on reducing inequalities and different forms of discrimination, including widespread exclusion and unequal access to growth's benefits of women and girls, persons with disabilities, some ethnic/linguistic minority groups, and entire regions and countries. Inclusive growth also requires full respect for human rights.4

Sustained Economic Growth: Sustained economic growth, in the sense of dynamic, enduring, or self-propelling growth, requires structural and especially technological change, that is, the ability of an economy to constantly generate new fast growing activities characterized by higher value added and productivity. Industrial development has been historically and continues to be for most countries an important phase of their growth process, especially in the transition from predominantly agricultural economies.

1 Preparation of the brief has been coled by UNIDO, UNDP, UN-HABITAT and UNEP, with contributions from

ESCAP, WFP, UNFPA, UNWOMEN, ITU, ILO, OSAA, OHRLLS, OHCHR, IFAD, ECE and UNICEF 2 Cornia and Martorano, 2012. Development Policies and Income Inequality in Selected Developing Regions,

1980-2010, UNCTAD Discussion Papers, No. 210 December. 3 Inclusive growth is a multidimensional concept involving income and non-income related aspects. However,

since some of the non-income dimensions of inclusive growth such as education (TST Issues Brief: Education and Culture), health (TST issues brief: Health and Sustainable Development), social protection (TST Issues Brief: Social Protection) or promoting social and gender equality (upcoming TST Issues Brief on Promoting Equality and on Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment) are dealt elsewhere, this Issue Brief will mainly focus on income and employment dimensions. This in no way should be construed as a diminishing of the importance

Sustainable Economic Growth: Inclusive and sustained economic growth can improve the quality of life and avoid reaching physical limits if the environment is protected. However, economic growth can be more or less resource-intensive and environmentally damaging. Over time, with technological advances, it has become and should continue to become less so. Yet, the sheer scale of global economic activity is placing heavy stresses on the Earth's natural systems, not least the climate system. Energy consumption per capita increased nine-fold over the last 200 years. Materials use per capita more than doubled over 1900-2005. Carbon emissions continue to rise at a rapid pace, and local and regional pollution and waste impose costs on human health and well-being in many parts of the world. Developing and deploying the technologies that will make possible low-carbon, sustainable growth entails structural changes for which many countries are not prepared. Easing labour market adjustments, correcting market failures that under-reward investments in green technologies, and stimulating emerging green product markets are all functions that governments can perform to ease the transition to sustainable growth paths.5

Industrialization. Industrialization has a pull-effect on other sectors due to productive linkages. An expanding industrial sector enables economic diversification and fuels the demand for more and improved primary goods (agriculture, forestry, fishing and mining) and services (banking, insurance, communications, trade and transport). Agro industry, for example, provides capital and services to farmers (e.g. seeds, fertilizers and equipment, training, production and market information), promotes entrepreneurship and creates jobs, adds value through agro-processing, and connects farmers with markets through the handling, marketing and distribution of agricultural products. As a result, the productivity, diversity and quality of agricultural production, farm returns, economic stability for rural households, food security and innovation throughout the value chain can be enhanced. An efficient agro-industry, combined with enhanced investment in agriculture, can help spur agricultural growth and, especially where focused on smallholders who rely upon land for their livelihoods, it can increase farmers' incomes and jobs and reduce food insecurity and malnutrition. As opportunities for income generation are more restricted in rural areas, where 75% of the poor still live, rural non-farm earnings from agro-processing and related service and trading activities can significantly boost household incomes. For developing countries as a whole, non-farm earnings already account for 30 to 45% of rural household incomes but this proportion could be increased more if processing plants and ancillary activities were to be expanded. With low capital requirements and undemanding local marketing channels, the rural non-farm economy offers openings for poor households (particularly women headed households), small-scale farmers and other smallholders, representing an important instrument for rural poverty eradication and transitioning from the informal to the formal economy.

Industry is an important vehicle for technology development and innovation. , representing a hub for technical progress. Empirical evidence shows that manufacturing is, by far, the sector in which most R&D investment is undertaken.6 It is recognized today that this type of investment has positive externalities that go far beyond the productivity gains achieved in the same sector, contributing significantly to productivity growth in other sectors and thus fueling overall economic growth.

Structural change and the development of widespread productive capacities are also crucial to dealing with the cyclicality and volatility of world markets. Economies go through periods of boom and bust. They confront shocks arising from rapid changes in import and export markets or from the level and

5 For a full treatment of the environmental implications of growth and development please refer to the Issue

Briefs on Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought and in the upcoming Issues Brief on Sustainable Consumption and Production (including chemicals and waste), on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction, direction of international financial flows. Financial markets have become more unstable than ever before. While all countries are affected by crises, developing countries are particularly vulnerable to shocks because of the precarious economic conditions they face. Diversified economies are less vulnerable to rapid changes in economic conditions and more resilient to confronting related shocks.

Inclusive and Sustainable Industrialization: By increasing the potential for decent job creation in high productivity sectors and thereby progressively improving wages, industrial structural change not only sustains economic growth but also has potential to make it inclusive. Globally manufacturing accounts directly for around 15-20% of total employment, with manufacturing's potential for direct employment generation inversely related to the level of income per capita. Least developed and other poor and vulnerable countries can often find substantial employment opportunities by shifting from agriculture to labor-intensive industries while middle and high income countries can grow jobs by shifting towards more technologically advanced industries and the services surrounding them. Yet, industrialization's employment impact will be significantly multiplied through the strong productive linkages that manufacturing has with other sectors

As labor shifts from agriculture to higher value added and higher productivity sectors, wages, skills, labor conditions and opportunities for female employment can all be upgraded. Historical evidence for the advanced economies and the successful newly industrialized countries shows that the improvement of wages associated with structural change due to industrialization helped greatly in pulling large sections of the population out of poverty. As industrialization proceeds, the quality of jobs improves even more. Besides having higher wages, more advanced manufacturing jobs typically provide better benefits (e.g., retirement plans, paid holidays, etc.) and security (e.g., life insurance, health insurance, etc.) than low-wage jobs .

Besides making industrialization inclusive, there is a need to respond to environmental concerns by increasing resource efficiency in production. For most industries the latter has also become a core determinant of economic competitiveness and sustainable growth. Since resource inputs represent an important cost of production for industries, efficiency improvements can be a significant lever for competitive advantage.7 Investments in improving resource efficiency and recycling reduce the demand for energy, water and virgin resources, thus reducing the need to invest billions on new energy and water supply infrastructure. For example, The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that, if countries focused on boosting energy efficiency, they could not only provide a 10 per cent reduction in global energy demand by 2030 but also save US$ 560 billion.

Infrastructure Development.

Ensuring sustained, inclusive and sustainable growth through industrial structural transformation requires investments in economic and other infrastructure:8

x Information and communication infrastructure, including broadband infrastructure - the information superhighways on which the global digital economy is being built;

x Energy and piped gas, piped water supply, sanitation and sewerage, and solid waste collection and disposal;

x Roads and major dam and canal works for irrigation and drainage;

x Other transport sectors-urban and interurban railways, bus rapid transit and other urban transport, ports and water ways, and air transport;

x Infrastructure for health care, education and skills development, etc.

7 Sustainable Europe Research Institute (SERI). 2009. Resource efficiency for sustainable growth: global trends

and European policy scenarios. Background paper for "International Conference on Green Industry in Asia, September 9-11, 2009, Manila.

8 Aspects of social infrastructure are dealt with at length in other issue briefs.

Adequate economic infrastructure improves productivity and reduces the costs of existing and new productive activity. Good infrastructure also helps saving on logistics costs and palliative investments such as electricity generators; on the time to get to work or to organize production processes with the attendant effect on labour productivity; on communication and information exchange time and costs; and on health expenditures due to less stress and better environmental conditions. Recent developments in ICTs and broadband networks are particularly suited to support the expansion of productive activity. For example, the World Bank (2009) notes that a 10% increase in broadband penetration increases GDP growth by 1.4% in developing countries, on average. The availability of infrastructure may help to attract investment, deepen markets and generate agglomeration economies through attracting productive capacity to a specific location. Located in places where disadvantaged groups are situated and when affordable access is addressed, energy, water, roads and communication facilities will have a direct impact on reducing inequality and making growth more inclusive. Gender sensitive or tailored health and social infrastructure, for example, can improve the security of women and girls and help their free movement and education. Proximity between jobs, residential locations and infrastructure, especially in disadvantaged areas, will contribute to narrowing spatial disparity and improve economic opportunities for all.

The processes of industrialization have and will continue to take place against, and perhaps due to, large shifts in the spatial distribution of people. In 2009 the world achieved a historical landmark when the population living in towns and cities reached 50%. Urbanization, which over recent years has taken place mainly in developing countries, is posing both challenges and opportunities for inclusive and sustained growth and structural change. Some cities are growing at rapid and unmanageable rates resulting in large and growing slum areas; overcrowding and pollution; unhealthy and unsafe environments; and inadequate housing, energy, health, water and sanitation, transport and leisure facilities. They are also highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. Yet, where properly governed, managed and planned, spatial inclusion can be achieved as the concentration of people allows for cheaper and more efficient provision of services and infrastructure and easier communication and knowledge exchange. Population concentration lies at the basis of the innovation capacities and the agglomeration economies necessary for industrial and economic transformation and, hence, provides the potential for huge improvements in human wellbeing. To ensure environmental sustainability, infrastructure development should take into account the carbon constraint, energy security, and the need for climate adaptation.

II. Overview of proposals

The MDGs were inspired by 'humanistic' and social justice views that put people at the centre of development. They drew on Sen's capability approach, where he argues that development should aim at expanding people's capabilities - their freedom to choose valuable "beings and doings" (which range from simple states such as keeping healthy or having a good job to more complex conditions such as being happy or having self-respect).9 10 The upshot of the emphasis on human and social development was a set of goals that related to reducing poverty and improving education and health

9 Sen, A., 1999. Development as Freedom. Oxford University Press. 10 The UN's Secretary General Millennium Report that underpinned the MDG's formulation emphasized the

"dignity and worth of the human person, respect for human rights and the equal rights of men and women, and a commitment to social progress as measured by better standards of life, in freedom from want and fear alike." (Annan, K. A., 2000. "We, the Peoples", the Role of the United Nations in the 21st Century. United Nations. pg. 6.) in developing countries, but did not pay any "serious attention to the transformation of productive structure and capabilities."11

It is important that emphasis on economic growth as a driver of development accompanies emphasis on the social dimension of development. Making things is a major source of human fulfilment and freedom. It satisfies the need for being creative and contributing to society through inventing, designing, building and working on products and services. It also often satisfies needs for social interaction and learning as the knowledge required for production is generated collectively in organizations through communication and exchange of views. Sen considered economic facilities, that is, the opportunities that individuals enjoy to utilize economic resources for the purpose of consumption, production, or exchange, as one of the 'instrumental freedoms' that are a crucial component of overall freedom. Hence, adding value may not be construed only as a means but also as an end.

The Rio + 20 outcome noted the importance of, and complementarities and linkages between, the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development and called for a new development agenda rooted in the core values of equality, sustainability and human rights.12 Early on in the text the document reads: "We therefore acknowledge the need to further mainstream sustainable development at all levels, integrating economic, social and environmental aspects and recognizing their inter-linkages, so as to achieve sustainable development in all its dimensions."13 As the world considers how to move beyond the expiration of the MDGs in 2015, the opportunity arises to anchor, among other things, the central role of economic growth and structural transformation in the post-2015 development agenda. There is growing support for this view in emerging proposals and the current post-2015 development discussion:

The role of inclusive and sustained economic growth to address different aspects of the post-2015 development agenda has been highlighted in a number of proposals. The HLP Report suggests as one of the indicative goals to "Create Jobs, Sustainable Livelihoods and Equitable Growth"14. The report stresses that a quantum leap forward in inclusive and sustained economic growth is necessary to create employment, particularly for the youth, and reduce poverty. Countries must strive to add value and raise productivity through industrialization and its concomitant capacity to produce a progressively higher quality and a greater range of products, to absorb new technologies and to innovate, as well as by modernising agriculture and services. Growth and industrial structural change will be accelerated by investments in infrastructure and skill development. The UN Global Compact Report makes a similar proposal as its first development goal: "End poverty and increase prosperity via inclusive economic growth". The rationale is that only economic growth that is inclusive can allow individuals to reap the benefits that markets and entrepreneurs provide and to improve on their self-esteem.15

Other documents emphasize the need for structural transformation. The draft report of the Growth and Employment in the Post-2015 Development Agenda Thematic Consultation led by the UN Development Group states that current economic structures in most countries are not suited for

11 Chang, H., 2010. "Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark: How development has disappeared from today's

"development" discourse", in S. Khan & J. Christiansen (eds.), Towards New Developmentalism: Market as Means rather than Master, Routledge, Abingdon, 2010.

12 UN General Assembly 2012. The Future we Want. Resolution adopted by the General assembly. pp. 2 13sustained job creation and raising incomes and that transitioning from the production of agricultural and mineral commodities towards sectors with higher value-addition in manufacturing and services, or from low-skill to high-skill manufacturing, is critical to sustained growth and development.16 A recent report by ECA and the African Union entitled "Making the Most of Africa's Commodities: Industrializing for Growth, Jobs and Economic Transformation" contends that industrialization is not merely one of several options for Africa, but in fact is the only choice for creating the large quantity of jobs - at least 10 million per year - that will be needed in the decades ahead to reduce and finally eradicate poverty while also meeting other development goals.17 The "Framework for Sustainable Development" makes the link between future industrialization and urbanization by pointing out that the establishment of sustainable cities will be a major vehicle to attract internationally mobile industries as well as determining the quality of employment and life.18 Finally, UNEP's Green Economy Report adds that achieving long term sustainable development requires greening the economy, which helps to improve human well-being and social equity and the reduction of environmental risks and ecological scarcities.19

III. The way forward

Goals, targets and indicators. The inclusion in the post-2015 development agenda of a goal related to "accelerating sustained economic growth that is both inclusive and sustainable" is an option that should be strongly considered. There is intrinsic value in increasing the availability of goods and services especially to the poor in an economy and, given current worldwide employment generation challenges, it is particularly topical to bring the issue of creating and expanding sustainable productive capacities back to the core of the development agenda. Doing so will show the capacity of the international community to learn from experience and reinstate one of the key factors for achieving prosperity back on an equal footing with other similar factors.

In the past growth was discussed exclusively from an economic perspective. Achieving high rates of growth (in terms of countries' standard measure of progress, that is, Gross Domestic Product) regardless of the distributional or environmental implications was the conventional wisdom. This is no longer the case. Years of research and experience have shown not only that there can be dire distributional and environmental effects of growth but that those can in turn affect growth negatively. Societies need to assess the performance of their economies not exclusively on the basis of GDP or its growth. Hence, the need for framing a growth goal in the context of sustainability, equity and human rights principles. A goal that encapsulates sustained economic growth, social inclusion and environment protection aspects will also provide the much sought integration, universality and simplicity to the SDGs. Sustained economic growth targets can be developed on the basis of industrial growth and structural transformation quantifications, e.g. shifts in economic structure. Job creation and social inclusion targets could be linked to specific equity aims like changes in Gini coefficient, poverty reduction, declines in economic vulnerability or increases in employment -- especially of women and youth; improvements in the quality of jobs and decent work and reductions in gender wage gaps. Environmental protection achievements could be related to reductions in energy intensity

16 UNDG, 2013. The Global Conversations Begins, Emerging Views For A New Development Agenda. Draft Report on Growth and Employment in the Post-2015 Development Agenda: Key Messages from the Thematic Consultation. United Nations Development Group.

17 Economic Commission for Africa, 2013. Economic Report on Africa. Making the Most of Africa's Commodities: Industrializing for Growth, Jobs and Economic Transformation.

18 Sustainable Development Solutions Network , 2013. The Structural Transformations towards Sustainable Development. Background paper for the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development and emissions and/or material use per unit of output, which could also be calculated at sectoral level. Measurable indicators could then be designed for all countries but cascaded down taking into consideration countries' individual realities, as diversity of national conditions will have to be respected.

Key challenges in designing an inclusive and sustainable economic growth related goal and its targets and indicators refer to definitional and placement issues. The definitional issue is whether economic growth is a means or an end. As already mentioned, much of the discussions around the MDGs considered economic growth as a means. Lack of clarity on whether economic growth is a mean or an end reflects the absence of a theory or framework that maps out the underlying causalities and development mechanisms. Even if economic growth were a means, there may also be a need to have key development means as goals, because of their importance in addressing fundamental ends such as poverty and hunger eradication. As to placement, difficulties may arise as to under which goal to place a specific target. For example, a female employment share increase target could well be placed under an economic growth, employment or a gender equality goal.

Data Availability. An inclusive and sustainable economic growth goal is relatively easier to grasp as the population at large is acquainted with basic economic data. Basic statistics are available for some of the possible targets and indicators related to production, distribution and use of resources, so initially it will not be necessary to generate significant amounts of new data, except perhaps in some areas of environmental protection, where fresh figures may have to be collected for specific targets and indicators. Some work may be necessary, however, for developing new indicators based on existing data including, if deemed necessary, for devising composite indices.

Having said that, an inclusive and sustainable economic growth goal may also lead to overall improvements in the collection and dissemination of statistics and galvanize already existing efforts to device new and more realistic measures of economic progress. More elaborate targets and indicators may require disaggregated data by gender, geography, income, industry and other categories, which is not always available. For example, current employment statistics in developing countries could be further improved to reflect better their labour markets and genderdisaggregated information on the sector, duration, security and quality of employment and data on the level of wages and earnings are especially lacking.

A new development goal focused on inclusive and sustainable economic growth may be a catalyst for measurements including market and non-market transactions to properly assess the contribution of all family members, including women, to emerging growth trends. Properly measuring production will be essential for monitoring economic activity.20 Similarly, an inclusive and sustainable economic growth goal will require governments and businesses to account for their social and environmental footprint and support existing UN efforts to promote corporate social responsibility, such as the System of Environmental-Economic Accounting adopted by the UN Statistical Commission in 2012, the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the UN Principles for Responsible Investing.

The role of the State in development. The extent of structural transformation required for sustainable growth raises the question of what is the role of governments in supporting the private sector to generate such shifts. According to one view governments should limit themselves to provide an enabling environment for businesses by securing property rights, enforcing contracts, streamlining procedures for starting new enterprises, putting in place effective legal processes for dispute resolution and, under certain circumstances, providing reliable infrastructure. In this view governments can legitimately intervene in cases of market failure, due to information asymmetries, existence of public goods, externalities and/or lack of competition.

There is, however, an alternative view that argues that rapid structural transformation and inclusive and sustainable industrialization can only be achieved if the state takes a proactive role in development in order to complement and/or nudge the private sector into action. In this case the state intervenes more 'strategically' in the economy to promote the growth of new industries and to reduce the dislocations caused by shifts in investment and profits from old to new industries. The government's role includes providing incentives that accelerate a process of discovering and developing successful sectors as well as filling the gaps where the private sector is reluctant to enter into risky but potentially successful and productive activities. At the same time governments may need to provide social services, redistribute gains from growth and protect people and markets from shocks in order to ensure that the benefits of prosperity reach all. States are also expected to enshrine in law the obligation to fulfil human rights and well-being of their people. The mechanisms of intervention by 'developmental states' vary from country to country, ranging from planning and direct state intervention to government regulation to government support for poorly functioning or incomplete markets.

Policy content.  Accelerating inclusive and sustainable economic growth will require a broad set of policies at the national level. There are four types of policies that deserve special attention:

x Building productive capacity: Governments will need to support expanding the supply of food and achieving food security without significant increases in land or water use by increasing agricultural productivity and reducing food losses and waste through public investments in rural infrastructure, research and development, provision of extension services -- including the spread of sustainable farming methods, and improving access to a range of financial services and financial capital. Special care will have to be given to industrial development given its key role in structural transformation. Fiscal or financial incentives that promote increasing productivity, reallocating resources towards higher value added products and industries, diversifying industry and expanding linkages with primary sectors will be necessary. Specific industrial policies may be needed for agro-industry. Policies aimed at positioning industrial firms at the right stage of global value chains so that they can profit from international trade in intermediate and semi-finished products will be crucial too.

x Technology and innovation policies: Industrial structural change is fundamentally a process of continuously incorporating knowledge into production and creating the new products and processes that will result in new activities or industries. Technology and innovation policies will vary significant depending on the income per capita and technological capabilities of different countries, with more advanced countries involved in advanced research and new product development and less advanced countries focusing on imitation, generating local absorption capacity, product adaptation and process technologies. Government backing for technology and innovation will include supporting and financing R&D investments; public funding and tax support for technological entrepreneurship and start-ups and for businesses developing new products and processes; promoting eco-innovation and green technologies; investing in professional and technical education in the fields of computer science and mathematics, engineering, and life and physical science; intellectual property protection; promoting technology transfer between research institutions and businesses and across countries; and, introducing measures aimed at expanding the demand for innovation.

x Infrastructure development policies: Providing and maintain infrastructure is one of the key government roles because of the positive externalities. In providing infrastructure, however, governments face several public policy dilemmas. The first is whether to utilize primarily public or private, domestic or foreign funds to finance infrastructure investments. Historically, infrastructure has been mainly funded from local government revenue and borrowing, followed in the case of developing countries by international public finance mainly channeled through international financial institutions. However, over the past few decades a larger share of funding has come from international and domestic private sources, but especially since the financial crisis accessing private finance for large infrastructure projects has become more difficult. There is also the issue of whether to provide centrally or decentralized (sub-national level) infrastructure given the very different cost implications; very often the answer will differ between high-density urban areas and less populated rural areas. A related issue is whether to establish a cross-country regional infrastructure and how to cooperate for its provision. Finally, there are dilemmas linked to subsidized provision and how to improve targeting to benefit the poor.

x Financial policies: Sustainable growth needs long-term predictable funding mechanisms as they focus on productive investments, capital formation, infrastructure and innovation. Policies must focus on three areas: supply of long-term funding, intermediation, and credit for SMEs. In terms of supply of funding, the main task is to increase the availability of investment financing through the reduction of costs and risks, and increasing the efficiency, of the financial system. Expanding the role of domestic development and investment banks would be an important step in this direction. In terms of improving intermediation, it is essential to create new trading venues; enhance transparency and information efficiency; introduce regulation and stricter requirements to reduce short-term and speculative financial trading activities; and, improve investor protection. Regarding SMEs, the challenge is to increase access to credit and insurance services through dedicated and varied funding mechanisms, including venture capital, introducing new securitisation mechanisms and developing standards for credit assessments of SMEs.

x Social policies: Economic growth policies need to be complemented with a commitment to social inclusion through social policies and social protection, policies aimed at sharing care more equally between men and women, guaranteeing equitable access to education for all, addressing inequalities and the specific needs of excluded groups, such as women, empowering individuals and social groups, assisting those affected by natural disasters and displacement.

Economic growth and structural transformation does not mechanically translate into widely shared gains. Improving inclusiveness is a complex process that depends on multiple factors. Specific approaches and instruments aimed at shifting resources towards dynamic activities such as competitive exchange rates, current and capital account as well as domestic demand management, taxation and banking regulation generally achieve the twin objectives of economic growth and inclusiveness. Yet, well-intentioned policies for all can have deleterious effects on specific groups of the population, if they are not based on social and environmental impact assessments. This is where the policy process becomes important.

Policy process. Policies must not only be well designed and thought out but also ought to be legitimate. Legitimation is about ensuring widespread acceptance of the policymaking process and avoiding rent-seeking and corruption. If stakeholders do not feel like they have ownership through their active involvement and do not see progress as a result of their contributions and inputs, the policy process may not lead to the desired outcomes and could result in a subsequent withdrawal of participants. An open, collaborative and transparent decision-making and social dialogue process that is trusted is thus essential. Legitimizing the policy process is consistent with modern governance principles.

Policy coherence and coordination. Policies aimed at expanding inclusive and sustainable economic growth in one country may affect the outcomes in other countries, so some degree of international policy coherence and coordination is necessary to avoid beggar thy neighbour situations and to ensure that countries upgrade their technological capabilities in timely fashion. Global trade liberalization, including the provision of duty-free, quota-free market access for LDCs, international finance, international migration21 and mechanisms for international transfer of technology are areas that benefit from international coordination.

Partnership(s) for development. Policies aimed at expanding inclusive and sustainable economic growth should rely on predictable and sustainable international financing. Therefore, external resources such as ODA commitments should be met, as was reaffirmed at Rio+20. Multilateral banks should be key actors in enhanced sustainable development financing, and new mechanisms of long term investment finance such as the 100US$ billion per year green climate fund need to be implemented. South-South Cooperation should be promoted as a complementary source of international financing and knowledge sharing. Multistakeholder partnerships have a valuable role to play as well in supporting countries' progress towards Sustainable Development Goals.

Issues Brief 13: MACROECONOMIC POLICY QUESTIONS (INCLUDING INTERNATIONAL TRADE, INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM AND EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY)1

Introduction

Macroeconomic policies, including those related to international trade, finance and debt management, are critical to support a global enabling environment for growth and sustainable development. The goal to develop a global partnership for development (MDG8) was intended to help countries achieve the MDGs. The challenge post-2015 is to improve further the enabling environment by incorporating sustainable development considerations that were not prominent in the MDGs. These include, for instance, equality, human rights and environmental protection. This brief is about how better coordinated macroeconomic and structural policies in both developed and developing countries can contribute to achieving sustainable development objectives.

The history of global financial and economic crises shows how macroeconomic and financial policies in some countries have the potential to set back growth and sustainable development efforts around the world. For example, the 2008 crisis exposed the inability of existing regulatory mechanisms to prevent excessive risk-taking and fraud in the financial sector. The crisis highlighted the need for macroeconomic policies to focus more on employment creation and to see risk in a wider perspective including social inclusiveness, the respect for human rights and environmental sustainability.

I. Stocktaking

a. Macroeconomic policy trends before the global financial crisis During the period between the Millennium Declaration and 2007, world GDP expanded at an annual average rate of 3.3%.2 This growth was driven by growing investment in emerging countries, international trade, and consumption in developed countries supported by relatively stable inflation, low interest rates and broadening access to credit. The burden of many highly indebted poor countries has been alleviated through debt restructuring. Unemployment and extreme poverty decreased significantly in many countries, directly accelerating progress towards the achievement of MDGs.

These positive outcomes, however, have occurred in a context of insufficient inclusiveness, growing global imbalances and financial risks, as well as environmentally and socially unsustainable production and consumption patterns. 3. Despite improved environmental standards and technological progress, expanding economic activity has resulted in growing environmental degradation and accelerated impacts of climate change, with fossil-fuel CO2 emissions rising on average by 3 per cent per year.4

Several processes have undermined the inclusiveness of economic growth. Globalization has benefitted mobile factors of production, such as capital and skilled labour. While global integration has generated considerable employment in developing countries, intense international competition and production offshoring have contributed to a growing disconnect between labour productivity

1 This Issues Brief was co-authored by UN-DESA and UNDP, with contributions from ILO, OHCHR, UN-ESCAP, and wages in many countries, especially in developed ones. Income inequality has continued to rise in most regions, compounded by weakening redistribution mechanisms. In developed countries, tax revenues as a share of GDP started declining, partly due to lower taxation rates, especially for capital income.5 Globally, growing tax avoidance by wealthy individuals and transnational corporations serviced through tax havens and offshore financial centres has further undermined public finances.

Before the crisis, growing global imbalances, accompanied by accommodative monetary policy in developed countries and reserves accumulation by many surplus developing countries, exerted downward pressure on interest rates globally. Private debt soared and financial market risks rose seemingly unnoticed, as weakly regulated credit intermediaries backed by too-big-to-fail banks built up leverage in the shadow-banking sector. Opaque and complex financial products that were designated as safe by credit rating agencies and sold to investors around the world resulted in large systemic risks, culminating in the financial and economic crisis in 2008.6

b. The international response to the global financial and economic crisis The international policy reaction to the crisis has focused on restoring financial and economic stability. Government support measures to the financial sector were announced in over 40 countries.7 G20 countries briefly coordinated their fiscal and monetary policies, delivering unprecedented monetary easing and fiscal stimulus. However, many countries soon turned to fiscal austerity measures with the declared objective of reducing budget deficits and public debts. They opted for expansionary monetary policies expecting to reignite economic growth. However, numerous studies have called into question the economic benefits of austerity measures.8 Since the crisis, the prices of financial assets have recovered in developed countries, but consumer demand and productive investment have remained muted. Further, unemployment has remained elevated and average economic growth has been cut in half compared to the pre-crisis period.

Many developing countries have weathered the crisis better. However, the crisis resulted in declining external demand and development aid.9 Slower economic activity coupled with unconventional monetary easing in developed countries has further impacted developing countries by nurturing sizeable and volatile short-term capital flows and speculative activity in foreign exchange and commodity markets which can exacerbate the volatility of food prices and consequently impact on hunger and nutrition. 10

The current approach to international financial reform has focused on ensuring the safety and soundness of the financial system, focused primarily on the banking sector. In accordance with the Basel III standards,11 most G20 countries foresee raising capital requirements for banks. However, several studies find that these changes are likely to be too small to increase the resilience of the

5 Facundo Alvaredo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez (2013)  The Top 1 Percent in

International and Historical Perspective , NBER Working Paper No. 19075. 6 United Nations, 2013a.

7 International Monetary Fund, Global Financial Stability Report, Washington, D.C., October 2012. 8On the economic impacts of austerity see e.g. Olivier Blanchard and Daniel Leigh, "Growth Forecast Errors and

Fiscal Multipliers," IMF Working Papers, WP/13/1 (January 2013); ILO, World of Work Report 2012 "Better Jobs for a Better Economy". On the human rights impacts of austerity see e.g. Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights: Austerity measures and economic and social rights, E/2013/82 (7 May 2013); Report of the Independent Expert on the question of human rights and extreme poverty, A/HRC/17/34 (17 banking system sufficiently. Meanwhile, facilitating access to finance, one of the primary functions of an effective financial system, has not been fully incorporated into the policy agenda. Given the risk weightings within the capital adequacy rules, Basel III could further limit access to finance for smaller entities and long term financing. Basel III is being supplemented by other measures, such as those promoted by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), to enhance financial stability.13 However, ineffective coordination of macroeconomic policies and inadequate financial reform continue to undermine robust and stable economic growth.

c. International trade14 Open trade is a means to create employment and contribute to MDG achievement through greater economic activity and revenues. Developing countries can derive significant benefit from an open, fair, rule-based, predictable, and non-discriminatory trading and financial system (MDG8). 15

Trade liberalization can contribute to increased growth through enhancing access to technology, intermediate and capital goods and increased competition, which in turn could reduce poverty through employment creation. The synergy between trade liberalization and economic growth can be strengthened if other complementary policies are in place, e.g. investment in public goods, such as education, transport and information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure, which could enhance the ability of individuals and firms to take advantage of trade opportunities and to diversify towards higher value-added exports over time.

The distribution of the gains (and losses) from trade remains a concern. Trade expansion can accelerate structural change in economies, creating near-term winners and losers. Globalization has been one contributor to rising income inequality.16 This highlights the importance of complementary measures to mitigate the negative impacts and equitably distribute the benefits of a more competitive trading system.

Special and differential treatment and aid for trade are critical to the promotion of a fair trading system. Additional measures such as improving rural infrastructure to help integrate rural households into world markets, increasing rural education to enhance labor mobility and expanding access to credit, can further enhance the potential gains from trade.

The effect of trade on the environment and emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) is ambiguous. Trade liberalization can lead to more efficient production, but can also lead to shifting production to countries with lower environmental and labour standards. Furthermore, trade induces freight transportation pollution. A recent study shows that two-thirds of trade-related emissions come from production activities, and the remainder comes from international transport. However, this mix

12 United Nations, 2012, Word Economic Situation and Prospects 2012, New York 13 http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/list/fsb_pa/index.htm.

14 Issues related to the functioning and challenges facing the multilateral trading system are numerous and

require detailed discussion. Due to space constraints, this issues brief will not address them in full. The issues brief on means of implementation and global partnership for development can touch upon the prospects for multilateral trade cooperation, including issues such as delivering on a development-oriented Doha Round or addressing non-traditional market access.

15 United Nations, 2012, Realizing the Future We Want for All, Report to the Secretary-General by the UN

System Task Team on the Post 2015 Development Agenda, June 2012, (New York), See also Principle 12 of the Rio Declaration 1992; para. 2.9 of Chapter 2 of Agenda 21; para. 47 of the Plan of Implementation of the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development; and the Preamble to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the varies widely across products and across countries. It is important to facilitate greater emission efficiencies in production-including through the transfer of clean technologies, transportation and adoption of sound environmental policies.

d. External debt sustainability External debt can help States weather economic shocks and fund social and economic objectives at times when domestic resources are limited. However, servicing grossly unsustainable debt can threaten the ability of States to realize these same objectives. The inability of States with heavy debt burdens to access affordable credit during the current crisis has revealed problems with the existing debt framework.

The fact that risks posed by unsustainable debts persist in developing countries, despite the near completion of the Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative, further illustrates the problem with the existing framework. Out of 39 eligible countries, 35 have reached the completion point in HIPC and are receiving irrevocable debt relief. One of the remaining four countries is receiving interim relief and the other three are making progress towards reaching the decision point. However, the HIPC eligibility criteria are sometimes seen as restrictive. In some cases, the criteria impose conditionalities, such as ceilings on commercial and private borrowing, which are contested by recipient countries.18 Recently, several sovereign debt restructurings have taken place in developing countries, especially in the Caribbean, but in most cases, these have either been insufficient or not timely. Several other countries mostly in sub-Saharan Africa are also in high risk or in debt distress.19

II. Overview of proposals

The UN System Task Team (UNTT) has pointed out that working towards achieving sustainable development would require a broad approach to macroeconomic policies. This approach should combine macroeconomic and financial stability with broader structural policies that would enable the generation of productive and decent employment, the reduction of poverty and inequalities, low-carbon and resource efficient growth, and welfare protection.20

In order to achieve development goals, donors have been urged to reaffirm their ODA goals of disbursing the equivalent of 0.7 per cent of their GNI, out of which 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of their GNI should target LDCs, with a clear timetable.21 These efforts should be matched by fiscal policies in developing countries that speed up domestic resource mobilization through, for example, the strengthening of the tax base.

An OECD action plan, welcomed by the G20 in St. Petersburg in September 2013, aims at containing growing tax avoidance by designing new rules to limit double non-taxation of income.22 The proposal emphasizes the importance of addressing the issue of income generated by the digital economy, which can easily be shifted to low-tax jurisdictions. Greater transparency and improved data will be

17 Anca D. Cristea, David Hummels, Laura Puzzello, Misak G. Avetisyan, 2011, "Trade and the Greenhouse Gas

Emissions from International Freight Transport", NBER Working Paper No. 17117 18 See for instance the Report of the Independent Expert on foreign debt and human rights, Cephas Lumina, An assessment of the human rights impact of international debt relief initiatives, A/HRC/23/27 (11 June 2013). 19 United Nations, 2013b, The Global Partnership for Development: The Challenge We Face, MDG Gap Task

Force Report 2013, New York. 20 United Nations, 2012, Realizing the Future We Want for All, Report to the Secretary-General by the UN needed to determine the location where financial assets are created and investments take place as well as where multinational corporations report profits for tax purposes. Developing countries are also often less equipped to deal with transfer mispricing by multinational enterprises. For this reason, the UN Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters has developed a Practical Manual on Transfer Pricing for Developing Countries.

Private sources are critical in providing long-term financing.23 The UNTT flagged the importance of a renewed global partnership, which should inter alia promote longer-term investment, including foreign direct investment, in critical sectors such as transportation, agriculture, energy, infrastructure, and ICT. The new partnership should also identify effective mechanisms to mobilize additional resources for financing sustainable development.24 The intergovernmental expert committee on a sustainable development financing strategy is currently working to develop options in this regard.

Existing proposals to strengthen and reform the international financial system have two interrelated and mutually reinforcing aims: to reduce its fragility and instability, and to facilitate a reallocation of global investments toward sustainable development. In this spirit, the Report of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons to the Secretary-General calls for reforms to ensure stability of the global financial system and encourage stable, long-term private foreign investment.25

To increase international financial stability, there are policy proposals to address global imbalances and the volatility of cross-border capital flows. The Commission of Experts of the President of the United Nations General Assembly recommended that the international reserve system make greater use of International Monetary Fund (IMF) Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) as a way to reduce systemic risks associated with global imbalances, and as a low-cost alternative to accumulation of international reserves.26 To better manage large and volatile cross-border capital flows, the G20 endorsed the use of capital flow management measures alongside macroeconomic policies.27 A reliable global financial safety net could also reduce incentives for countries to hold reserves. In addition to increased flexibility in the IMF's lending facilities, there are proposals to improve cooperation between national central banks, regional mechanisms and the IMF.

Proposals to strengthen financial regulation include suggestions by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to tighten oversight and regulation of large and systemically important financial institutions, beyond the general standards of Basel III28 Further reforms of derivative markets, uniform global accounting standards, and reform of compensation practices in the financial sector are also needed. Despite historically low debt levels in developing countries, the lack of a rules-based approach to sovereign debt workouts remains a concern, eliciting calls for an international bankruptcy procedure. There is also a call for greater transparency, accountability and participation in international financial institutions like the World Bank and the IMF.

Additional investments are needed to address social needs, infrastructure gaps, and green technologies. Proposals to facilitate such investments include a report by international organizations

23 United Nations, 2013d, A New Global Partnership: Eradicate Poverty and Transform Economies Through

Sustainable Development, The Report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, p.26.

24at the request of the G20, which recommended tapping the potential of institutional investors, capital markets and development banks. However, without a reduction in risk and changes to incentives, the private sector is unlikely to contribute to its full potential in financing sustainable development investments. A background study to inform the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing, prepared by a United Nations Inter-agency Working Group, calls for donors to meet ODA commitments, but also for multi-faceted policy reforms aimed at reducing impediments to private investment in sustainable development, including: (i) reducing risks by improving the enabling environment; (ii) public leveraging of private resource flows; and (iii) better aligning private incentives with public goals.

The UN has called for a speedy conclusion of a development-oriented Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations in order to increase market access for developing countries and increase workers' mobility. In order to allow developing countries to be able to reap the full benefits of open global markets, support to enhancing country supply side capacity, including through the Aid for Trade platform, must be strengthened.30

International debt sustainability initiatives should go beyond the HIPC initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). Some developed and developing countries remain critically indebted or are at significant risk of debt distress.31 In 2012, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) formulated the Principles on Responsible Sovereign Lending and Borrowing.32 These Principles specify the responsibility of both sovereign borrowers and lenders and advocate a code of good conduct and institutional setup for concluding debt transactions. The IMF is considering strengthening its debt sustainability and market access assessments of countries to prevent the use of resources to bail out private creditors and decrease the costs of debt restructuring. It is also calling for clearer rules for public sector involvement as creditors, especially for non-Paris Club creditors.33 The UN has also proposed setting up an international working group to examine options for enhancing the international architecture for debt restructuring.34

III. The way forward

a. Forward looking macroeconomic policies focused on sustainable growth, decent work and reduction of inequality35

In order to support economic stability, comprehensive financial regulation should not only ensure the safety and soundness of the financial system, but also equitable access to finance and sufficient long-term financing for sustainable development. Financial regulatory reforms should eradicate the occurrence of moral hazard arising from the existence of "too-big-to-fail" entities. Compensation incentives that enticed individuals to take excessive risk should be altered and executive compensation should be tied to long-term returns. Overall, 'light touch' financial regulation should be replaced by an approach that assesses the potential damage financial 'innovation' can inflict on the real economy and that clearly distinguishes business mishaps from systemic fraud. The UN

29 www.g20.org/load/781255094. 30 United Nations, 2013b, p.13.

31 Ibid, p.12. 32 See http://www.unctad.info/upload/Debt%20Portal/Principles%20drafts/SLB_Principles_English_Doha_22-

Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights offer concrete guidance for establishing a fair, rules-based system of accountability for businesses, including those in the financial sector.36

There is a need to shift away from macroeconomic policies focused predominantly on curbing inflation to the neglect of stimulating employment growth. Instead, forward-looking macroeconomic policies37 should promote long-term public and private investment in support of broad-based, sustainable growth and decent employment. This may, at times, require the use of countercyclical policies to smooth economic cycles and minimize the human impact of economic shocks.

Forward-looking macroeconomic policies can further improve inclusiveness by ensuring the provision of public goods even in times of crisis. For example, maintaining a social protection floor and investment in human capital through good quality universal health and education services can reduce poverty and inequality while promoting long-term economic and social stability.

The mobilization of domestic resources should be strengthened through progressive taxation, including capital income. International cooperation must be enhanced to eradicate financial secrecy and double non-taxation, and curb individual and corporate tax avoidance and evasion, and fight corruption and the illicit flow of funds.

Forward-looking macroeconomic policies and the reform of the international trade and financial system should also promote environmentally sustainable development patterns. This transition would be facilitated by the adoption of a new system of national accounting capturing not only economic, but also environmental stocks and flows. Public investment as well as incentives for private investment in 'green' technologies should be strengthened. 'Green' investments should be increased to secure clean water, air and energy as well as to reverse the trend of increasing CO2 emissions and enable the needed 80% reduction in global CO2 emissions by 2050. Environmental externalities should be priced into goods prices through carbon taxes or other schemes.

b. International trade Policies are needed to alleviate pressures on workers in sectors that could lose as trade expands, especially in vulnerable groups of countries, such as the least developed countries. Impact assessments are necessary to ensure that environmental, human rights and social impacts, including on food security, are accounted for and mitigated.38 Ensuring the compatibility of these policies with a transition to more open trade is desirable. Trade protectionism could deprive the world of an engine of economic growth and the gains associated with improved efficiency. Social protection systems can help in the adjustment process.

Trade can be harnessed to reduce inequality with continued efforts to promote skill upgrading to help workers adjust to changes in global markets and to benefit from new opportunities. At the same time, strengthening the ability of producers to compete through productive sector development policies and trade facilitation initiatives should also help support job creation.

Trade in 'environmental goods and services'39 that promote sustainability and productive transformation and innovation should also be supported. Producers' access to skills and

36 United Nations, Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations "Protect, Respect and Remedy" Framework, 21 March 2011, A/HRC/17/31.

37technologies to be able to adapt to global market demands for environmentally sustainable products will become increasingly important. 40 Appropriate policies are needed to internalize negative environmental externalities related to transportation systems and production techniques used.

c. External debt sustainability The international financial community should assure timely debt relief for countries struggling with unsustainable debt. To prevent more countries falling into debt distress, the international community should also devise principles to reduce excessive debt and encourage countries to lend and borrow responsibly. The UN Guiding Principles on Foreign Debt and Human Rights offer guidance in this regard. To promote further progress, the United Nations should convoke an international working group to examine options for enhancing the international architecture for debt restructuring.41 One of the aims of this working group would be to consider designing a more formal and comprehensive sovereign debt workout mechanism which would bring more transparency to the process.

In conclusion, a macroeconomic strategy that uses all available policy instruments to balance the objectives of inclusive economic growth with socially acceptable distributional outcomes and environmental sustainability is essential to a strategy for sustainable development.

including the relationship between WTO rules and specific trade obligations in MEAs; observer status for MEA

Issues Brief 14: ENERGY

1

I.

Stocktaking

Energy is central to sustainable development. It accelerates social and economic progress and enhances productivity. No country has developed without access to reliable and affordable energy. Without access to sustainable energy services, other development goals cannot be achieved. Energy directly impacts on people, communities and countries in terms of economic growth, employment, health, security and education. It also affects ecosystems and is linked to climate change. Sustainable energy is thus a key enabler of sustainable development for all countries and all people.

The UN General Assembly declared 2012 as the "International Year of Sustainable Energy for All" and the 2014-2024 decade as the "UN Decade of Sustainable Energy for All". The latter declaration stresses "the need to increase the share of new and renewable sources of energy in the global energy mix as an important contribution to achieving universal access to sustainable modern energy services, and recognizes that the activities of countries in broader energy-related matters are prioritized according to their specific national challenges, capacities and circumstances, including their energy mix"2.

The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) did not include a specific goal on energy, but during the High Level Plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the MDGs in 2010 "energy" was recognized as a key prerequisite for achieving these goals. In 2011 the UN Secretary-General created the global initiative on "Sustainable Energy for All" (SE4ALL) which is a broad based partnership.

The world faces urgent and complex challenges related to access, sustainability and efficiency of modern energy services. Energy crises have the potential to generate major economic and political crises, with wide reaching social and environmental consequences. Nearly one out of every five people has no access to electricity. Twice as many - nearly 3 billion people - use solid biomass or animal waste to cook their meals and heat their homes, exposing their families to smoke and fumes that damage their health. Indoor air pollution kills nearly 3.5 million people a year, particularly women and

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. Contributors to this brief include: UNEP, UN-WOMEN, UNDP, ESCAP, World Bank, DESA, UN-Habitat, OHRLLS, UNIDO, FAO, CBD, IFAD, UNFF, WMO, WHO, ESCWA, UNESCO

The Future We Want The Rio+20 outcome document recognized "the critical role that energy plays in the development process, as access to sustainable modern energy services contributes to poverty eradication, saves lives, improves health and helps provide basic human needs." It also recognized the need for global partnerships to address the socioeconomic and environmental challenges facing nations in their pursuit to provide sustainable energy to their citizens.

The UN SG's Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) Initiative was launched in September 2011 with the aim of achieving three main objectives by 2030: ensuring universal access to modern energy services, doubling the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix and doubling the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency. More than 70 Governments from around the world have formally engaged with the initiative. Businesses and investors committed over $50 billion. The initiative aims to catalyse major new investments to speed up the transformation of the world's energy systems. The initiative's Advisory Board is co-chaired by the Secretary-General and the President of the World Bank.

children. More than 95 per cent of people without access to modern energy services live either in sub-Saharan Africa or developing Asia, and 78 per cent in rural areas. Although about 75 per cent of the world's commercial energy is consumed in urban areas, the majority of the 850 million urban slum dwellers rely heavily on biomass fuel for cooking. The demand for fuel wood and charcoal contributes to environmental degradation and deforestation as charcoal becomes a thriving yet unsustainable industry in forest areas with easy access to urban centres. Some of the recent energy initiatives have not yielded the expected benefits to the poorest countries. Energy access rates are much lower for LDCs than for the other developing countries. To ensure that this "energy gap" is addressed properly, the specific needs of LDCs on energy should be prioritized in the various international energy initiatives and taken into consideration when discussing energy in the post-2015 development framework. Although the issue of universal energy access is critical, financing a global effort to achieve this objective is estimated to be relatively inexpensive, equivalent to only 3% of global investment in energy infrastructure over the period to 2030.4

Economic and social development is seriously impeded by the lack of sustainable energy services.

Countless examples have shown that, once modern energy is available, families and businesses benefit enormously from services such as light, power, heat and opportunities for job creation and income generation. For instance, WHO estimates that if half of the global households that still use traditional fuels and stoves switched to cleaner cooking sources, over a ten year period, families would save $34 billion per year and generate an economic return of $105 billion per year.5

Energy is closely linked to food security. Energy is essential for modern and efficient agri-food chains, allowing higher output. High energy prices increase the cost of food production and hence influence food prices. High energy costs for cooking create an incentive for poor communities to use more firewood, from forests, contributing further to land degradation affecting biodiversity and the environment's capacity to sustain food production. A wide range of bioenergy types exist, as well as a variety of production and utilization systems that have very different social, economic and environmental impacts. In some cases, the use of staple crops as feedstocks may influence food prices. At the same time combined food-energy systems offer opportunities for improved efficiencies.

Gender inequalities are exacerbated by the lack of universal access to energy. "Women and children bear the main negative impacts of fuel collection and transport, indoor air pollution, and time-consuming and unsafe cooking technologies".6 Often women spend from 1 to 4 hours a day collecting biomass for fuel, thus the burdens of energy poverty and unpaid work fall more heavily on women.7 Fuel collection is also a dangerous task, which increases women and children's exposure to violence, affecting households' and communities' productivity and well-being.8

Currently, 85 per cent of primary energy is fossil fuel based. Use of fossil fuels accounts for 57 per cent of all anthropogenic GHG emissions, with CO2 concentrations having exceeded 390 ppm, or 39

3 Lim S, et al. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and

risk factor clusters in 21 regions 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet, 2012, 380(9859):2224-2260.

4 IEA, World Energy Outlook. Energy for all - Financing access for the poor, 2011. 5 UNDP, Achieving Sustainable Energy for All in the Asia-Pacific, 2013 6per cent above preindustrial levels, by the end of 2010. Based on a business as usual scenario (current policies scenario), the world's energy demand will increase by 47 per cent by 2035, resulting in rising CO2 concentrations and enhanced global warming.10 Air pollution from energy systems adversely impacts human health and productivity. Air pollution has other long term negative impacts on natural capital (e.g. water resources, forest and biodiversity) with further implications for sustained provision of ecosystem services. Meanwhile, if the SE4ALL objectives for renewable energy and energy efficiency are simultaneously met, the probability of limiting global warming to two degrees Celsius increases to 66-90 per cent.11

Although many countries already have renewable energy and energy efficiency programs with energy market reforms and revised regulations, more national and especially internationally coordinated policies and measures are required to make global energy systems more efficient economically, more benign environmentally and more equitable socially. In terms of the global energy system the Global Tracking Framework report notes: "the world made major advances on the energy front during the last 20 years. An additional 1.8 billion people gained the benefits of electrification, while 1.6 billion people secured access to generally less-polluting non-solid fuels. Energy intensity has dropped significantly, cutting cumulative global energy demand by more than 25 per cent over 1990-2010". Although renewable energy consumption grew by 2 per cent annually over 1990-2010, the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix increased only slightly from 16.6 per cent in 1990 to 18.0 per cent in 2010.12

Major transformations of current energy systems are needed. Energy choices made today will determine the energy future over the next decades, given the long investment cycles in this sector. Key elements of a transformation towards sustainable energy entail (1) designing and implementing robust policy and regulatory reforms, thus creating attractive investment climates, (2) strengthening the institutional capacity and creating effective business models, and building the necessary skills in the labour force to match the market needs, and (3) facilitating financing for investments from public, private, national and international sources.

Often energy issues are not addressed comprehensively as part of integrated national development strategies and sector policy reforms. Also, many countries do not mobilize adequate resources from public and private sources for energy investments. Numerous examples suggest that, in order to attract and sustain both large- and small-scale investments and ensure a coherent overall approach to energy development, enabling policy frameworks, capacities, institutional frameworks and expertise at national as well as local levels are needed. Creating favourable conditions and removing barriers for public and private investments in clean and sustainable energy solutions through policy and regulatory reforms will help to level playing fields for and lower risks of investments in clean energy. Conditions that govern energy markets, such as pricing, tariffs, access to finance and procurement practices are important.

In terms of energy access a clear focus on lower income, more vulnerable people and communities is needed. There is the need to increase the institutional and systemic capacity of developing countries, particularly LDCs and energy-poor countries, to access and benefit from financing, technology, knowledge and partnerships, as highlighted in the Istanbul Programme of Action for the LDCs.13 Decentralized energy solutions are particularly effective when they are combined with

9 http://srren.ipcc-wg3.de/report/IPCC_SRREN_Ch01.pdf 10creating new employment and income opportunities and when they cater to demands from sectors such as health, education, agriculture and water, especially in rural areas. Strengthening energy supply chains via capacity development, standardization, guidance and training for users and local technology suppliers is also necessary.

Decarbonizing and increasing the efficiency of existing and new energy infrastructures is a key part of the energy transformation. Energy infrastructure needs to adapt to climatic changes, such as altered water cycles, warmer ambient air temperatures, sea level rise and more frequent extreme weather events such as floods or typhoons. The actual and avoided costs of such adaptation measures should increasingly be integrated within development planning.

Energy efficiency is key to the transformation of energy systems. It is a proven and immediate, cost-effective near-term option14, representing 70 per cent of the reduction in projected global energy demands in 2035.15 It offers a unique opportunity to reconcile economic competitiveness and industrialization with sustainable development and provides the added benefits of reducing the cost of energy and increasing energy productivity. It is an attractive upfront investment that pays for itself in a short period of time and its full value goes well beyond the energy savings and includes a wide range of socio-economic benefits, including security, job creation and poverty alleviation through greater energy affordability and access.16 Smart grids, which are a combination of electrical power technology and telecommunication technology, are expected to improve the energy efficiency of power systems.

Renewable energy potential in addressing the sustainable energy challenges. Renewable energy resources still remain largely unexploited, especially in developing countries. These resources could be used to satisfy increasing energy demand. Important technological advances have taken place in recent years that enable better harnessing of these energy resources and make them more accessible. Renewable energy holds much promise, but only if it is interlinked with the local knowledge base and related education and training. Investment in renewable energy also generates vast employment opportunities associated with development, construction, installation and maintenance for all renewable energy technologies in many countries.17

II.

Overview of proposals

Several proposals for integrating energy issues into the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) framework have been made so far. These can be broadly grouped into those that have a dedicated SDG on energy and those that have energy within other SDGs addressing different development dimensions. The majority of the proposals that have been developed so far support the option of an explicit goal on energy.

A) Proposals for Dedicated Sustainable Development Goals on Energy

This approach has been put forward, among others, by:

x The Secretary-General's High Level Panel on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. The illustrative energy goal of "Secure Sustainable Energy" consists of four main targets: ensuring universal access to modern energy services; doubling the share of renewable energy in the global mix; doubling the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency in

14buildings, industry, agriculture and transport; and phasing out of inefficient fossil fuel subsidies that encourage wasteful consumption.

http://www.un.org/sg/management/pdf/HLP_P2015_Report.pdf

x The Sustainable Energy for All initiative of the Secretary-General. The goal consists of three objectives to be achieved by 2030: (1) ensuring universal access to modern energy services, (2) doubling the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency and (3) doubling the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix.

http://www.sustainableenergyforall.org/objectives

x The Global Thematic Consultation on Energy and the Post-2015 Development Agenda. A key recommendation was to establish "Sustainable Energy for All" as the global goal on energy. UN-Energy, in its recommendation to the Global Thematic Consultation proposed that "Sustainable Energy for All" (or an alternative wording reflecting the same idea) be considered the overall energy goal in the post-2015 development framework (http://www.worldwewant2015.org/node/336381). Furthermore, the Energy Consultation identified the nexus of energy and health services, as it pertains to women's health, as a priority. Two additional targets having clear gender impacts were identified: reducing by half the number of premature deaths due to indoor and outdoor air pollution, and providing modern energy services to 400,000 primary healthcare facilities in developing countries. http://www.worldwewant2015.org/node/339192

x Save the Children. The vision of Save the Children for a post-2015 framework includes a goal for energy defined as "By 2030 we will deliver sustainable energy for all." Four targets are recommended: universal access to modern energy services; eradication of preventable deaths from cooking stoves and open fires; doubling the share of renewable energy sources in the global energy mix; and doubling the global rate of improvements in energy efficiency. http://www.savethechildren.org/atf/cf/%7B9def2ebe-10ae-432c-9bd0-df91d2eba74a%7D/ENDING_POVERTY_IN_OUR_GENERATION_AFRICA_LOW_RES_US_VERSI ON.PDF

x The United Nations Global Compact. The set of global sustainable development goals proposed by the Global Compact includes as a dedicated energy goal: Sustainable Energy for All. This goal includes four targets: universal access to modern energy services; doubling the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency in production, distribution and consumption; doubling the share of renewable sources in the energy mix; and reducing by at least 50 % the particulate concentration in urban air, not to exclude the achievement of more stringent regional targets. http://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/news_events/9.1_news_archives/2013_06_18/UNG C_Post2015_Report.pdf

x Monash Sustainable Institute, Stockholm Resilience Centre, et al., (Nature, March 2013). This group of experts on planetary boundaries proposes the goal of "Universal Clean Energy," to improve universal, affordable access to clean energy that minimizes local pollution and health impacts and mitigates global warming. This contributes to the UN commitment to sustainable energy for all and addresses MDG targets on education, gender equality and health. http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/1696griggs2.pdf

B) Proposals for inclusion of energy within clusters of different Sustainable Development Goals

Proponents of this approach argue, among other issues, that bringing together related policy objectives along different dimensions would limit the number of goals and allow numerous related

goals to be addressed jointly. This approach has, for example, been put forward by:

x The report of the Sustainable Development Solutions Network. This report proposes a shared framework for sustainable development composed of a limited number of priorities and associated goals. The goal that includes energy is "Curb Human-induced Climate of climate change. Also, the goal promotes sustainable energy for all. http://unsdsn.org/files/2012/12/121220-Draft-Framework-of-Sustainable-Development.pdf.

x The European Commission in a Communication to the European Parliament. The paper suggests that the framework could address the following clusters of issues by 2030: 1) "ensuring basic living standards"; 2) "promoting the drivers for inclusive and sustainable growth"; 3) "ensuring sustainable management of natural resources"; and 4) "promoting equality, equity and justice; and peace and security". In this framework, energy falls under "promoting the drivers for inclusive and sustainable growth." http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/documents/2013-02-22_communication_a_decent_life_for_all_post_2015_en.pdf.

Additional proposals on targets and indicators that link energy with other development factors include:

x AHead of State/Government level event on "Sustainable Energy for the Least Developed Countries"18 called for all the relevant actors to work together to develop and establish a common global goal on energy as part of the Post-2015 Development Agenda and that the special needs of the LDCs on energy should be specifically prioritized within this framework.

x World Health Organization. Expert consultations led by the WHO have proposed health indicators for energy targets, including indoor air pollution exposures, as well as access to modern energy sources in health facilities.19 http://www.who.int/hia/green_economy/indicators_energy2.pdf

x In addition, UN-Energy is currently preparing an analysis on possible options for energy goal/targets/indicators as an input to the on-going SDG discussions, including a potential global goal of securing sustainable energy for all, with a series of possible targets/indicators including on universal access, energy efficiency, renewable energy, energy-health nexus, energy-water nexus, energy-food nexus, and energy-women's empowerment nexus.

III.

The way forward

From the proposals highlighted in the previous section as well as the global consultations on energy which culminated in the Oslo High Level Meeting on Energy in the post-2015 Development Agenda, consensus is emerging about the need for energy to be explicitly integrated into the new development agenda.20 This could take the shape of a specific SDG on energy, with targets that are inspired by the SE4All objectives.

Energy is an enabler for development and is cross-cutting in nature. Thus energy could also be embedded in other potential goals, e.g. food security and nutrition, water, gender equality, livelihoods and health, via targets and/or indicators. Such integration would help remedy the silo approach, which has been identified as a lacuna in the MDG implementation. For example, within a target on food productivity, there could be an energy-related indicator on energy intensity of food production and distribution systems. Similarly, an efficiency target could include energy efficiency of the water sector or water efficiency in energy production as possible indicators. Finally, targets on

18 See also the Co-Chairs' Communiqu of High-Level Event on Sustainable Energy for the Least Developed cleaner and more efficient stoves and cooking fuels and technologies for household needs would help improve the health and income-earning possibilities of women and wellbeing of their families, as well as freeing women's time for other activities.

Designing an SDG framework whose goals, targets and indicators respond meaningfully to multifaceted challenges should embrace the following characteristics: (1) Strong linkages between energy and other sustainable development goals; (2) Decoupling21 of socio-economic development from escalating resource use, fossil-fuel dependency and environmental degradation; and (3) Scientific monitoring and verification. Although suggested formulations of a possible "Energy SDG" vary in scope and exact wording, the following elements have emerged as important in the processes shaping energy in the post 2015 agenda:

Universality: An overarching goal on "sustainable energy" needs to be formulated keeping in mind its universality character.

Integration and nexus approach: Simultaneous increases in the demand for water, energy, food and materials resulting from a growing global population will require integrated resource planning at regional, national and local levels and should include all sectors. The planning and delivery of energy and all other basic services could benefit from a "nexus approach". Energy requires a people-centred and ecosystem-driven approach, across countries and sectors. Given the long investment cycles that characterize the energy sector, the sustainable energy transformation needs to start today. Energy plans need to have built-in climate adaptation mechanisms and need to be in line with other globally agreed targets, such as keeping global warming under 2oC and the Aichi Biodiversity targets. A holistic approach linking energy, employment and social protection policies should be encouraged. Efforts to promote affordable renewable energy can create employment and improve productivity in poor areas.

Flexibility and adaptability to local conditions: Investing in renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency is critical to enabling access to modern energy services. Renewable energy allows the harnessing of clean resources that are often available locally. Furthermore, renewable energy technologies have a competitive advantage, given their flexibility and adaptability, in decentralized energy systems particularly for use in rural isolated communities.

Participation of stakeholders, energy security and governance: At global, regional, national and local levels, access to clean and affordable modern energy services requires many actors and stakeholders whose involvement should be made more systematic and gender equitable. Increased transparency and accountability in energy-related decision-making and diversification of the energy mix will contribute to improving energy security. Energy efficiency will contribute to reducing the need for new infrastructure investments and to reducing fossil fuel imports.

Accountability and tracking: There are major data gaps in many developing countries that represent a key challenge for monitoring progress on energy objectives. More, better and gender disaggregated data need to be collected to inform decision making and gender mainstreaming in national energy plans and programs. Significant progress has been made on developing an accountability and tracking framework to support any potential future incorporation of energy into the post 2015 Framework, but more is needed in terms of quality and quantity of data at the country and local levels to ensure effective monitoring of trends and gaps.

Building capacities and a knowledge base: The energy challenges and the role of renewable energy in addressing these challenges, call for building capacities and promoting a local knowledge base to harness the available renewable energy resources, promoting local innovation and increased scientific knowledge adapted to different contexts and needs. Another priority is awareness-raising and outreach to explain the key role energy plays in sustainable development. Science, technology and innovation should be used to provide effective solutions and accurate information for such efforts

Technology: Support for R&D needs to be substantially increased to drive technological innovation and reduce the cost of efficient and clean energy technologies. A number of developing countries have engaged already in developing technologies adapted to local contexts, and South-South transfers will play an increasing role. Nevertheless, an effective technology transfer mechanism is necessary to accelerate the transformation of the energy systems in many developing countries.

Business Models: Different business models need to be promoted, including decentralized energy systems for rural remote areas and city locations (off-grid, small-scale, community-based, gender-sensitive sustainable energy planning). Development of sustainability criteria and reduction of costs for the sustainability certification of energy products are critical issues to address. Thus a process to develop such a set of sustainability criteria needs to be defined with follow-up implementation in the near future. Also, internalizing external costs associated with generation, distribution and use of energy should remain a long term goal.

Finance, trade and capacity development: Access to mainstream commercial financial products and services for clean energy investments should be made more readily available in developing countries particularly for women entrepreneurs and relevant partnership initiatives such as pro-poor public-private partnerships. Cross-border agreements and regulations for energy trade and investment need to be enhanced. Efforts could be undertaken to promote more predictable and competitive energy markets, including through fossil fuel subsidy reforms, trade agreements, and information exchange and dialogue. Trade disputes would need to be addressed to allow for complementary energy security, technology transfer and low carbon development. Developing capacities on energy issues is necessary for all stakeholders including policy makers, regulators, academics, civil society organizations, investors, entrepreneurs and financial institutions. Adequate skill development policies should be in place, especially for the youth, to empower workers to seize new opportunities and to mitigate the risk of skill shortages in renewable energy sectors. Strengthening women's access to education in science, technology and information will increase technology absorption and innovation capacity and underpin the effectiveness of the post-2015 agenda.

Existing global investment in the areas covered by the three objectives of SE4All was estimated at around $400 billion in 2010. The additional annual investments required to achieve these objectives are estimated to be at least $600 to $800 billion.22

Issues Brief 15: MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION; GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT1

Introduction

The notion of 'Means of implementation' describes the interdependent mix of financial resources, technology development and transfer, capacity-building, inclusive and equitable globalization and trade, regional integration, as well as the creation of a national enabling environment required to implement the new sustainable development agenda, particularly in developing countries.

The implementation of the post-2015 development agenda will require States and other relevant actors, acting individually and collectively, to adopt policies and mobilize resources to advance equitable, human rights-based, sustainable development. In this regard, a renewed and strengthened global partnership for mobilizing the means of implementation needs to (i) address the social, economic and environmental dimensions in an integrated manner; (ii) build on existing commitments and governance structures, ensuring that new initiatives reinforce previous successes; (iii) reinforce coherence in the implementation of a universal post-2015 agenda, leveraging resources across diverse funding mechanisms; and (iv) strengthen governance and accountability frameworks, providing for multi-stakeholder engagement, including for financing, technology innovation and diffusion, and capacity building for people and institutions.

I. Stocktaking

States, acting individually and collectively, bear the primary responsibility for implementing the development agenda. Other actors at the national, regional and global level share responsibility for supporting sustainable development, particularly in those areas where collective decision-making is needed, i.e. in the provision of global public goods.

At the global level, the concept of partnership has been used for many decades to describe a compact of commitments on promoting development, entailing national ownership and leadership, supported, in the case of developing countries, by conditional financial transfers, technical assistance, trade preferences, and accordance of special and differential treatment. The current global partnership for development (MDG 8) was conceived at the United Nations Millennium Summit in 2000 and enhanced in the 2002 Monterrey Consensus. The global partnership has played a central role in bringing attention to fulfilling aid targets, increasing market access, providing debt relief, improving access to the benefits of information and communication technologies (ICTs) and essential medicines. It also helped bring greater focus to the special needs of the most vulnerable countries, namely LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS. Yet, MDG 8 has important gaps and systemic shortcomings, and there is a discrepancy between its initial level of ambition and its actual implementation. MDG 8 failed to integrate sustainable development concerns as well as international human rights commitments. It also lacked stakeholder accountability and, in some cases, measurable targets. In addition, MDG 8 perpetuated a "donor-recipient" type of relationship and did not pay sufficient attention to development financing other than aid.2

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. The preparation of this issues brief has been led by UNDP, UNEP and DESA. Contributors to this brief include: ESCAP, FAO, ILO, IOM, ITU, OHCHR, OHRLLS, UN OOSA, UN

Multi-stakeholder partnerships have proven successful in mobilizing resources, have brought efficiency gains in programme delivery, and have also helped to build consensus around controversial issues. Yet, when not carefully built, overseen and implemented, some multi-stakeholder efforts have had a poor track record of promoting systemic change, may have resulted in a greater fragmentation of financing, and have sometimes created parallel structures of delivery. Initiatives such as Every Woman Every Child (EWEC), Sustainable Energy for All (SEFA) and the Zero Hunger Challenge (ZHC) have proven that with leadership, coherence and accountability, the multi-stakeholder partnership model works in mobilizing new money, catalyzing innovation, and achieving scale. As the experience of these initiatives shows, multi-stakeholder efforts combined with ODA can leverage financial and other resource flows from both public and private sectors, as well as mobilize resources such as technology, research, human capacity, and more.

Sustainable development financing comes from domestic and external sources, and includes both public and private flows. Public and private sources should be seen as complements, not substitutes, as each has unique objectives and attributes.

Public policies and sources of revenue are critical both to address market failures and to raise resources for financing long-term investments in infrastructure, high risk investments such as innovation and new technologies, other global public goods, and merit goods like social protection and basic education. Despite improvements in recent years, there is a significant gap between developed and developing countries in their capacity to raise public revenues. The median tax-to-GDP ratio in low-income countries remains only about half the median ratio in high-income countries. Substantial State resources are often tied up in debt repayments, despite previous debt relief initiatives. In addition, illicit financial flows seriously undermine many countries' efforts to mobilize domestic resources.

Globally, official development assistance (ODA) remains an important source of public financing for developing countries, particularly those without sufficient access to other sources. In the least developed countries, ODA represents about half of all external financing available to close their savings gap3. Yet, the 0.7 per cent of gross national income (GNI) ODA target, including the 0.15 per cent to 0.20 per cent target for least developed countries, remains largely unfulfilled by donors. Since 2010, when it reached its peak, ODA from OECD DAC member countries has fallen for two consecutive years, by a total of 6 per cent in real terms, to $125.6 billion in 20124.At the same time, a range of innovative development financing proposals have been successfully implemented in recent years, but need scaling-up to raise additional financial resources.

To address the existing scarcity of public finance for sustainable development, North-South public finance transfers related to climate change and ecosystem finance activities among others have increased over recent years. There has been a proliferation of public, private, domestic, bilateral and multilateral sources of financing with over fifty international public funds (multilateral and bilateral), 55 carbon pricing mechanisms and countless equity funds in operation. As a result, the financing landscape is complex and inefficient, with many funds underfunded.

In terms of private sources, domestic financial systems in many developing countries lack depth and tend to be dominated by banks, whose financing is generally short-term in nature. Equity and bond markets remain underdeveloped in many countries. Foreign direct investment (FDI) is generally the main external private source. . However, in both developed and developing countries, the private sector does not sufficiently finance sustainable development investments - including preserving the global commons and other global public goods, long-term investments such as infrastructure, and high risk investments such as innovation and new technologies, SMEs and other aspects of inclusive finance such as women's access to financial services. Therefore, in order to leverage private finance, it is a task of governments to align the interests and incentives of the public and private sectors as well as financial actors with the imperatives of sustainable development.

Article 15 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights recognizes the right of all people "to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its applications." UN commitments over the past 20 years have facilitated technology transfer across the world. However, progress in technology transfer has fallen short of the ambitious goals laid out in Agenda 21 and subsequent sustainable development outcomes, and technological progress has sometimes failed to produce envisaged development results. This is often due to the absence of a favourable enabling environment. As stated in the Monterrey Consensus: "Foreign direct investment contributes toward financing sustained economic growth over the long term. It is especially important for its potential to transfer knowledge and technology, []. A central challenge, therefore, is to create the necessary domestic and international conditions to facilitate direct investment flows". While important, FDI is not the only source of technology. Trade is an additional important means for diffusing new technologies and knowhow, including environmental technologies.

The share of GDP devoted to Research and Development (R&D) in developing countries has increased from about a quarter of the share in developed countries in 1996 to nearly half of it in 2007.5 South-South Cooperation has become an important catalyst for absorption of technologies tailored to developing countries' needs. Further empirical evidence is required on the relationship between intellectual property rights and technology transfer to support policy makers in finding the right balance between accessibility and reward (for creativity and innovation) which remains a fundamental challenge in building inclusive and sustainable development paths.

Technology's potential to address concerns over growing resource scarcity and worsening environmental degradation has begun to be drawn on, but there is still enormous unrealized potential. The challenge is to decouple - through environmentally sound technologies - service provision from resource use and environmental degradation. It is technically feasible to increase global eco-efficiency by a factor 4 or more by 2050.6

Capacity building is a cross-cutting issue in all sustainable development policy documents, including Agenda 21 and the Rio+20 outcome document. It is inextricably linked to funding, the science-policy-society interface, and monitoring and assessment.

The UN-coordinated capacity building work at the national level is in part focused on mainstreaming human rights and environmental sustainability in UN country programming processes. This includes the work on developing One UN programmes, the UN Development Assistance Frameworks, the MDG Achievement Fund, and targeted training courses, among others, recognizing the special needs of least developed countries. The Rio+20 outcome document also called for the continued and focused implementation of the Bali Strategic Plan for Technology Support and Capacity-building7, as endorsed by UN General Assembly. In addition, there is a need for capacity-building for policy coherence and integrated approaches to sustainable development, which is lacking in all countries.

5 World Bank, World Development Indicators 6 v. Weizsaecker, 1998, Factor Four; Decoupling Report International Resource Panel 7 The UNEP Governing Council /Global Ministerial Environment Forum (GC/GMEF) adopted the Bali Strategic

Plan for Technology Support and Capacity Building (BSP) at its 23rd Meeting in February 2005, which provides a framework for UNEP to strengthen the capacity of governments in developing and transitional economy countries to achieve environmentally sustainable outcomes consistent with the programmatic goals of the Council.

Trade growth has decelerated since the global economic and financial crisis, but merchandise trade in developing countries continued to grow faster than the world average. As a result, several developing countries have emerged as key players in the global economy, successfully using participation in the multilateral trading system to generate growth, employment, and poverty reduction. But other developing countries, particularly the smaller, poorer, and more vulnerable ones, have yet to reap the full benefits of trade, reflecting a lack of productive and export capacity and, in some sectors, distorted markets and complex non-tariff barriers.

II. Overview of proposals

A renewed, inclusive and strengthened global partnership that embodies the core values of human rights, equality, including gender equality, and sustainability is at the heart of many proposals for the post-2015 development agenda. The UN Task Team has called for a global partnership in a spirit of mutual respect and benefit, based on strong collective actions and clear commitments of Member States. The Ethiopia Symposium of the Development Cooperation Forum found that the renewed global partnership (i) must build on MDG 8 and the global partnership for development, as set out in the Millennium Declaration, Monterrey and Johannesburg; (ii) should continue to concentrate on ending poverty and promoting sustainable development; (iii) must build on ODA and ensure that commitments are fulfilled; (iv) must be owned and led by the range of stakeholders; (v) should strengthen statistical and other capacity in developing countries; and (vi) should promote complementary partnerships at all levels.

The Secretary-General's High-level Panel also recommends multi-stakeholder partnerships in each thematic area of future goals, on a national, regional and global level, to agree to respective responsibilities and accountability for implementation. The Sustainable Energy for All initiative, the Zero Hunger Challenge, Every Woman Every Child along with others such as the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation (GAVI), are good examples of such partnerships. Partnerships are also an increasingly important tool for the UN system. With its convening power, the UN is well-placed to bring a wide range of actors together. The Secretary-General has proposed a new UN partnership facility, to help achieve greater accountability, coherence, efficiency and scale, and a more supportive enabling environment for UN partnership activity. It will do so by ensuring transparency and integrity to partnership efforts; providing common support services that will facilitate the work of the UN system with external players; creating a platform for information-sharing across the system; and supporting multi-stakeholder partnerships under the Secretary-General's leadership.

Significant private and public resources will have to be mobilized to support the post-2015 development agenda, and the overall financing framework will have to include both. The Secretary-General's High-level panel suggested that this overall framework could be based on the Monterrey principles, whereby external financing provides an important complement to domestic sources.

In terms of private financing, a report by international organizations at the request of the G-208 recommended tapping the potential of institutional investors, capital markets and development banks to provide additional long-term financing. Public policies to facilitate this reallocation include (i) reducing risks by improving the legal and fiscal environment and increasing so-called "finance readiness"; (ii) public leveraging of private resources; and (iii) more closely aligning private incentives with public goals, including improved environmental, labour and human rights standards.

Investment opportunities are also enhanced by adherence to the rule of law, which assures private sector actors of transparency, predictability and accountability.

Migrant remittances reached USD 401 billion in 2012 - three times the size of ODA.9Remittances represent one of the largest sources of foreign currency earnings in a number of recipient countries. There are numerous proposals to bring down the cost of remittances, including the "5x5 objective" endorsed by the G8 and the G20 to reduce remittances costs by 5 percentage points (from 10 to 5 per cent) in 5 years, by 2014.

There are several proposals to facilitate additional domestic public resource mobilization for development. One proposal, as stated in the Rio+20 outcome and already being pursued in the context of the G20, is to phase out fossil fuel subsidies. Studies have shown that these subsidies only poorly target the poor, are hugely costly, and encourage fuel waste. Other proposals include addressing tax administration, including tax evasion and tax avoidance. Developing countries are also often less well-equipped to deal with transfer mispricing by multinational enterprises. For this reason, the UN Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters has developed a Practical Manual on Transfer Pricing for Developing Countries.

Developed and developing countries alike would benefit from a permanent and effective sovereign debt workout mechanism to resolve their debt problems10.The IMF has decided to review its sovereign debt restructuring policies and practices following the IMF Board discussion on Sovereign Debt Restructuring.

Aside from calls for fulfilment of existing ODA commitments, and ODA reallocation towards the poorest and most vulnerable countries, which lag most behind in achieving the MDGs, there are efforts to reduce the complexity of sustainable development finance. The UNFCCC established the Green Climate Fund to manage a significant share of climate finance and reduce the fragmentation of the international climate finance architecture. Proposals of innovative development finance mechanisms include internationally coordinated taxes such as a carbon tax and financial and currency transaction taxes. Many have already been successfully implemented at the national level, showing that such measures are technically feasible and gaining political momentum. Non-tax measures such as the use of the IMF's special drawing rights for development finance have also been proposed.11

Rio+20 called for exploring options for a facilitation mechanism that promotes the development, transfer and dissemination of clean and environmentally sound technologies by, inter alia, assessing technology needs of developing countries, options to address them and capacity building. The High-Level Panel underlined the necessity of "promoting collaboration on and access to science, technology, innovation, and development data", explicitly proposing this under one of its 12 illustrative goals (Goal 12f). It also underlined that technology should be used to promote sustainable consumption and production patterns. The Secretary-General has produced two reports12 outlining options for a technology facilitation mechanism for sustainable development.

The post-2015 global partnership for development should include measures designed to facilitate the development and transfer of technology for the benefit of all women and men, particularly the

9World Bank, 2013, Migration and Development Brief No. 20, Washington DC. 10 UNCTAD is currently coordinating an international Working Group on Debt Workout Mechanism to examine most vulnerable, such as access to information and communications technologies, essential medicines and other basic but potentially life-changing and life-saving technologies.

National administrative and technical capacities have long been identified as key drivers for sustainable development and lack of capacity as a major bottleneck for achieving the MDGs. A renewed global partnership must therefore focus on capacity building through national, regional and international efforts, in particular on:

- strengthening the capacity of countries to create the national public policy frameworks for human rights-based, equitable and sustainable development;

- promoting good governance and combating capital flight, both in developed and developing countries;

- aid for trade, which targets developing countries' ability to sustainably improve their productive capacity with investments in trade related areas coming from ODA;

- prioritizing capacity building in LDCs for production and access to medicines and other basic needs;

- developing human resources through, inter alia, training and strengthening professional development, including technical and vocational education and training, the exchange of experience and expertise, knowledge transfer, and through new and emerging technologies, including via ICTs;

- strengthening national monitoring and evaluation capacities through increased availability of technical data and information in decision support systems;

- South-South and triangular development cooperation, including in areas such as human resources development, exchanging skills, technical support and sharing good practices;

- investment in a robust, vibrant civil society sector that encourages participation, including volunteering, in service delivery, advocacy and accountability;

- a strengthened science-policy-society interface, including access to and building capacity to use knowledge products that could support decision-making to integrate the social, economic and environmental dimensions of development.

To reap the full benefits of trade, it is important to formulate domestic trade policy as part of a coherent policy framework comprising appropriate environmental and social policies. A universal, rules-based, open and equitable trading system (including the exchange of environmentally sound technologies) can act as an engine to generate economic opportunities, employment and increasing resource efficiency. The successful conclusion of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations would help developing countries increase their share in international trade and help correct certain trade distortions, including agricultural subsidies, tariff peaks, and tariff escalation. Progress on the Doha Round could also result in fisheries subsidy reform and the reduction of trade barriers to environmental goods and services, both of which would yield important sustainability dividends.

Another area where cooperation can be strengthened is migration and human mobility.

In order to function as a human development enabler and not create new inequalities and vulnerabilities, migration needs to be mainstreamed in development planning and requires partnerships and cooperation at all levels. Existing partnerships - such as the Global Forum on Migration and Development, Regional Consultative Processes on migration and bilateral accords such as the EU's mobility partnerships - could be enhanced and complemented.

Creating a national enabling environment is paramount to ensure effective means of implementation, including attracting financing, promoting trade and investment, developing capacity-building and fostering technology transfer. The respect for human rights and the rule of law, including representative, effective, and accountable institutions should be promoted at the national level to ensure the implementation of the future agenda.

III. The way forward

An integrated global partnership with effective means of implementation and strong accountability mechanisms could best respond to global challenges such as poverty eradication, food insecurity and malnutrition, gender inequality and climate change, among others, in the context of the post-2015 development agenda. At the global level, the UN could play a critical role in providing the global platform for reporting and review, including through a strengthened monitoring and accountability framework. With its regular reviews starting in 2016, the High Level Political Forum (HLPF), under the auspices of the ECOSOC, could act as the central place to review progress on the follow-up and implementation of sustainable development commitments and objectives.

Such a renewed and strengthened global partnership will require coherence and consistency across various UN intergovernmental processes, including those relating to sustainable development, the post-2015 development agenda and financing for development. Coordination between the HLPF and other bodies in the monitoring of the post-2015 commitments, such as the biennial Development Cooperation Forum, as well as the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, could contribute to enhancing coherence, finding synergies and avoiding duplication.

Civil society, the private sector, the media and other relevant stakeholders should play a significant role in the delivery and the monitoring of the global partnership, including through effective participation in the HLPF. This is also echoed in report on the consultations on the post 2015 development agenda, A million Voices: The World We Want, which highlighted that "the consultations have revealed a huge appetite and demand for involvement not only in the design of the development agenda, but also in its future implementation".

At a sub-global level, it would be desirable that periodic meetings of regional bodies dedicate sessions to sustainable development implementation through mutual and voluntary accountability reviews, as was suggested by the High Level Panel report on the post-2015 development agenda. Multi-stakeholder partnerships and accountability mechanisms could also be established for particular goals, drawing from examples such as the Commission on Accountability for Women's and Children's Health, and its independent Expert Review Group.

Enhanced data availability, disaggregated by criteria such as age and sex, which requires investment in data collection and management systems and transparency, should also allow the media, civil society and citizens to monitor the progress at the national, regional and global level. The UN, through the annual reports of the Secretary-General, could continue to provide a global overview on sustainable development and the implementation of the post-2015 development agenda.

Next steps for ensuring effective means of implementation in the future framework include the deliberations of the Open Working Group on the Sustainable Development Goals, the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing, as well as the Financing for Development follow-up process. Conceptually, there are several structural options - as elements of means of implementation and the global partnership could be defined as relevant to each separate goal, and/or as a broader, integrated and global commitment on a set of instruments to deliver the common agenda.

Finally, a follow-up Financing for Development Conference would meaningfully inform the post-2015 development agenda process. The Secretary-General's High-level Panel has recommended that "an international conference should take up in more detail the question of finance for sustainable development". It also suggested that "that this conference should discuss how to integrate development, sustainable development and environmental financing streams. A single agenda should have a coherent overall financing structure."

x 2.7% of GDP is devoted to R&D activities in North America, while only 0.4% is devoted to it in Africa.a x Of the world's researchers, only 27% are women.b x Only 0.5% of the world's researchers live in LDCs (European Union: 20.1%, North America: 21.9%).c x An estimated 2.5 million engineers and technicians will be needed in sub-Saharan Africa alone to achieve improved access to clean water and sanitation.d x 74% of inhabitants of developed countries are Internet users, compared with only 26% in developing countries.e ________________________ (a) Global Investment in R&D, UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS), 2012; (b) UIS, 2012; (c) UNESCO Science Report, 2010; (d) Engineering: Issues, Challenges and Opportunities for Development, UNESCO, 2010; (e) http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/global.shtml.

Issues Brief 16: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION, KNOWLEDGE-SHARING AND CAPACITY-BUILDING1

The pivotal importance of Science, Technology and Innovation (STI), Knowledge-sharing and Capacity-building2 for eradicating poverty and achieving sustainable development has recently been confirmed at the Rio+20 Conference and the 2013 ECOSOC Annual Ministerial Review. While research and innovation become increasingly open, collaborative and international,3 access to the benefits of STI and knowledge is unequally distributed within and among countries and people, and the technological gap between developing and developed countries is persistent. STI and knowledge must be harnessed for the benefit of all, including the most vulnerable and marginalized.

I. Stocktaking

STI can be 'the game changer' of the socioeconomic situation of developing countries and economies in transition.4 Development of national STI capacities has been proven to be an important prerequisite for the social and economic transformations that enable sustainable economic growth, human development and poverty eradication.5 Policies to promote innovation lay the foundation for future growth, productivity improvements, entrepreneurial and employment opportunities. Success in innovation requires a holistic approach with all elements in the innovation eco-system reinforcing one another.

The speed at which we are approaching planetary boundaries6 is increasing, and in some cases they are already being exceeded.7 Enhanced scientific knowledge, including geospatial data, about Earth system functioning, has significantly advanced our understanding of the impacts of human actions on vital Earth systems and can provide options for technological solutions as well as management and policy responses aimed at decoupling economic growth from escalating resource use and

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. The preparation of this brief was led by UNESCO, with contributions from IFAD, ITU, UNAIDS, UN-WOMEN, UNDP, UNEP, UNISDR, UNOOSA, WFP, WIPO and WMO.

2 'Capacity-building' or 'capacity development' is defined as "the process by which individuals, organizations,

institutions and societies develop abilities to perform functions, solve problems and set and achieve objectives. It needs to be addressed at three inter-related levels: individual, institutional and societal." UN ECOSOC, Definition of basic concepts and terminologies in governance and public administration, E/C.16/2006/4.

3 See also remarks of the UN Secretary-General at the launch of the Global innovation Index, Geneva, 1 July

2013. 4 Bokova, I., 'An Integrated Policy Approach in STI for Sustainable Development', in INSEAD-WIPO, The Global

Innovation Index 2012 5 Report of the UN Secretary-General, Science, technology and innovation, and the potential of culture, for

promoting sustainable development and achieving the MDGs, 2013 Annual Ministerial Review of ECOSOC environmental degradation.8 The integration of scientific with indigenous and local knowledge is increasingly considered an important element of policies and programmes to manage natural resources in an environmentally and economically sustainable and culturally appropriate manner.9

Investment in knowledge systems, including Research & Development (R&D), has expanded globally, including in many developing and emerging countries. The distribution of R&D efforts between North and South has changed with the emergence of new actors in the global economy, creating a more competitive global environment.10 In parallel, there is a growing emphasis on the relationship between knowledge, innovation and growth, especially in middle-income countries, with increasing focus on STI policy frameworks. This is steering countries toward enhancing innovation involving university-industry collaboration and competitive research funding.

The ways in which knowledge is created, processed, diffused and applied have been revolutionized in part through rapid developments in information and communication technologies (ICTs), leading to the creation of dynamic networks and cross-border collaborative processes. The internationalization of research and higher education has increased the mobility of skilled professionals, scientists and academics, and is an important mechanism for knowledge sharing and technology transfer. Even so, lack of a highly skilled workforce and limited investments in STI are preventing middle-income countries from competing with the high-skills and high-innovation products of the advanced economies,11 while a lack of basic skills prevents large numbers of poor people in middle- and low-income countries from exploiting economic opportunities and technologies potentially available to them.

Disparities in scientific capacity and STI development levels within and between countries and regions remain significant12 and science and scientific cooperation still need to be globally inclusive:

x insufficient government commitment and resource base for STI, including financing, technology and capacity, poorly designed national STI policies and lack of organizational capacities to implement the policies have hampered development of innovation capacities in many countries;

x unequal access to STI and knowledge as well as to their benefits remains persistent within and among countries. Developing countries, particularly Least Developed Countries (LDCs), Small Island Developing States and countries in post-conflict and post-disaster situations, continue to lag behind in Gross Domestic Expenditure on Research and Development (GERD) and in international collaboration in science. At the same time, emerging economies are starting to close the STI gap in relation to industrialized countries, which is prompting new avenues for South-South collaboration in STI;

x the lack of good quality national data and mechanisms to ensure access to and use by decision-makers needs to be addressed;

x in many parts of the world, women's participation in most fields of science remains low, with fewer women than men enrolled in science education, working in STI sectors, and participating in decision-making in scientific institutions.13 In addition, there is insufficient internationally comparable data, gender analysis and gender impact assessment with respect to R&D/STI;

8 Cf. Dobbs, R. et al., Resource Revolution: Meeting the world's energy, material, food and water needs, McKinsey & Company, 2011, and Lubin, D.A, Esty, D., The Sustainability Imperative, Harvard Business Review, May 2010.

9 One of the successful examples is the development of prevention and preparedness schemes and early warning systems on weather hazards.

10 UNESCO Science Report, 2010, and World Intellectual Property Report The Changing Face of Innovation, x millions of people, including persons living with disabilities and people living in rural and remote communities, continue to face barriers for accessing the benefits of STI, science education and ICTs; equitable access to adequate infrastructure, including ICTs, is lacking.14

x the widening economic gap between nations is increasingly linked to corresponding gaps in terms of levels of STI development; low- and middle-income countries vary substantially with regard to the R&D investment and capacity of their public research institutions, science-industry cooperation, infrastructure and policy frameworks for technology transfer, as well as the accountability dimension for public R&D expenditures.15 A key difference with high-income countries is the weak linkages between public R&D and national economic development.16

x the lack of absorptive capacity in firms and their focus on imitative innovation and acquisition of foreign technology contributes to fragmentation in national innovation systems. The barriers to industry-science collaboration include a lack of communication channels between business and universities, differences in organizational culture, uncertainty of market potential for research results, and high costs for developing and commercializing university research.

x there is a disconnect between policy-makers, technical experts (scientists, engineers, etc.) and users/citizens in generating, sharing and utilizing scientific knowledge, as well as between scientific knowledge production systems and other knowledge systems, including in terms of content/issues, context-responsiveness and adaptation, values, and sectoral involvement.

x there is a lack of consistent life cycle thinking and long-term perspective in the STI frameworks and policies of countries, especially in those of developing countries and the emerging economies.

A) Lessons learnt from the MDGs

The MDGs did not include any goal explicitly related to STI, despite the critical role in development. The MDG target 'Making the benefits of technologies, particularly ICTs, available to all'17 may be considered achievable by 2015 when it comes to the evolution of the ICTs sector and access to mobile services.18 However, the potential of ICTs has yet to be fully realized. Access to and use of information and knowledge facilitate the achievement of the MDGs. A substantial reorientation of development policies that draws upon new and established S&T knowledge was recognized by the MDG review process to be key for meeting the MDGs. Improving the policy environment, redesigning infrastructure investment, fostering enterprise development, investing in higher education in science and engineering, are some of the areas identified for policy action to achieve the MDGs.19 While several of them have been addressed in a number of countries, much remains to be done.

14 See for example: CIGI and KDI, Post-2015 Development Agenda: Goals, Targets and Indicators, 2012, or The

post-2015 delivery of universal and sustainable access to infrastructure services, Overseas Development Institute, 2013.

15 World Intellectual Property Organization, World IP Report 2011 (see Chapter 1 and Subsection 4.2.1). 16 This situation is often rooted in a series of factors such as: less developed human capital for S&T activity; low

quality research and low relevance of public research to the business sector; limited science-industry linkages, explained by a low absorptive capacity of firms and lack of business demand for S&T; lack of policies and structures to facilitate academic and other start-ups; limited access to financing for innovation.

17 Target 8.F: In cooperation with the private sector, make available benefits of new technologies, especially

B) Emerging challenges and opportunities

a) The full potential of STI, knowledge-sharing and capacity-building for poverty eradication and sustainable development will be best harnessed by building coherent enabling legal, policy, financial and institutional frameworks at the national, regional and international levels. These should fully take into account the needs and aspirations of all, in particular women and youth. National STI policies and systems need to be designed within the context of national strategies and action plans for sustainable development; they must be strategically linked to education policy, intellectual property and trade policies, macroeconomic and industrial policies as well as other efforts to increase productive capacities, particularly green technology development.20 The sustainability of STI initiatives in developing countries is key.

b) STI efforts should be more effectively targeted to address environmental, economic and social challenges and to provide sustainable and effective tools for strengthening sectors with the greatest poverty-reduction potential and/or involvement of people living in poverty. The UN TST Issues Briefs on Poverty Eradication, Employment and Decent Work, Sustainable Agriculture, Food Security and Nutrition, Health and Nutrition, Water and Sanitation, and Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction, Oceans and Seas, and Biodiversity all highlight the explicit linkages between each of these priority areas and STI, including the importance of the generation and sharing of scientific knowledge, the strengthening of the science-policy-society interface as well as the contribution of local and indigenous knowledge systems. Other areas such as equitable delivery of public services, especially for the most vulnerable populations, and the promotion of good governance, depend on targeted STI and particularly on ICTs.

c)

A strengthened science-policy-society interface is needed for ensuring that scientific research, technology development and policy both address the needs of society and respond to current and future sustainability challenges.21 The widespread integration of science into policy-making will greatly depend on science being 'useful, useable and used'22. Priority should be put on sharing and disseminating scientific information and on translating it into practical methods and policy options that can readily be integrated into policies, regulations and implementation plans. Enhanced mechanisms for science-policy dialogue and exchanges on all levels23 are needed together with the promotion of Open Access to scientific information and research.24 Science also has to interact with civil society to ensure an inclusive user-driven approach to knowledge, research and technology. It is also critical that research, development and deployment in all fields take into account existing gaps and gender perspectives, and that national and international research priorities benefit both women and men. Participatory methods can ensure that women's needs, preferences and constraints are not neglected; more generally, they are key to bringing knowledge inputs and feedback from technology and knowledge users back into the STI production loop.

20 UN SG Report, AMR ECOSOC 2013. 21 On the importance of the science-policy interface, see the Outcome Document of the Regional Consultations on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, Dakar, Senegal (10-11 December 2012), UNECA, AUC, AfDB, UNDP and the recommendations of the UN Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Global Sustainability Report Resilient People, Resilient Planet: A Future Worth Choosing, 2012.

22 Boaz, A., Hayden, C., Pro-active evaluators: Enabling Research to be useful, Usable and Used, Evaluation,

d)

Strategic investments need to be made in education, capacity development in STI and engineering, and innovation ecosystems. Strengthening science education at all levels, including technical and vocational education and training, entrepreneurship education and teacher training, with special attention to making them attractive to both women and men, is essential to catalyze innovation. Higher education and research institutions should be strengthened to produce the knowledge that informs policy and facilitates the adaptation of appropriate technology solutions to local contexts. The links between university and industry, technology and enterprise need to be created, expanded and supported. These efforts need to be complemented by provision of venture capital and facilitating competiveness of technology-driven businesses including those established by youth and women.25

e) Multidisciplinary and integrated as well as culture-sensitive approaches, bringing together natural and social and human sciences as well as local and indigenous knowledge, are key to build the necessary knowledge for sustainable development at all levels, with the participation of the scientific community, civil society and the different components of the private sector in the scientific process.26 Problem-solving approaches to research integrating multiple challenges and disciplines and ensuring openness in their dissemination, can lead to useful and usable knowledge generation. For example, considering the full life cycle of technology options for long-term provision of human needs, from raw material acquisition to waste disposal/recycling, is essential to ensure sustainable consumption and production. Participatory and flexible problem-solving approaches are also critical in sectors where challenges are very context-specific and evolve rapidly and, to varying extents, unpredictably such as the agriculture sector.

f)

Open access to knowledge and the free flow of information need to be expanded in order to maximize the potential of scientists to bridge the knowledge gaps within and among societies, facilitate economic growth and social cohesion, and promote good governance. ICTs, including open solutions, can significantly advance science in many fields, by, inter alia, promoting Open Access by scientists to each other's findings and data at no or low cost, harnessing multidisciplinary collaborations, scaling-up innovative ideas and supporting innovation and the diffusion and transfer of technology. Open access to patent information and patent analytical tools also offers a rich body of technological information that can support R&D and innovation. Tools that enable co-creation and and exchange, including digital platforms following the Free Open Source Software model, enable increased competition, access, and diversity of choice. Inclusive and affordable broadband and ICT policy and the empowerment of all men and women to tap into and leverage the rich reservoirs of creativity and ingenuity are required. Mobile technologies, especially when easily accessible, can open new innovation channels,27 including through improving service delivery and providing support for social movements. ICT solutions need to be accompanied by change management approaches to increase institutional acceptance. Partnerships with the private sector are also crucial to fully benefit from big data.

g)

Unintended consequences of STI need to be addressed and the precautionary principle applied.

While the potential return on investment in STI is usually high, the increasing pace of technological innovation raises ethical questions about the development and use of STI. The quick advances in the life sciences, such as in biotechnology, have raised public concern and require serious reflection about the benefits and risks involved. Also, privacy issues have to be taken into full consideration when deploying open data and making use of big data.

25 See for ex., Training Strategy for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth, ILO, 2010; Skills for Green Jobs: A

Global Review, ILO, 2012; Set of policy recommendations to meet skills needs for green jobs, Inter-Agency

h)

There remains an uneven global landscape in terms of innovation capacity reflecting a certain divide between innovation leaders and followers. In addition, connecting local technological needs to international technological opportunities is a challenge for many developing countries. A well-functioning STI ecosystem needs to include: political stability and well-functioning institutions; an educated workforce; sound research and education infrastructure and linkages between public and private innovation actors; enterprises committed to R&D; as well as proper framework conditions and incentives for innovators, including a balanced intellectual property rights (IPRs) framework. There is a need to prioritize national capacity-building for innovation focusing on the establishment of a conducive policy framework for innovation, especially in developing countries.

i) In addition to national strategies, regional and international frameworks including the UN and its agencies, funds and programmes must respond in new ways to ensure that sustainable innovation is integrated into national development priorities, particularly in LDCs, where the technological divide is greatest. Intellectual property (IP) is an important way of rewarding R&D investments and the commercialization of innovation, as well as promoting the disclosure and dissemination of technological information. Although a key element of the ecosystem, IP is not an end in itself. Commitment to the protection of IP through cooperation among States should be coupled with a commitment to ensuring that all countries are able to benefit from the use of IPRs for economic, social and cultural development. Finding the right balance between accessibility of technology and reward for creativity and innovation remains a fundamental challenge. Given that appropriate IP policies are context specific, there is also a need to ensure that, for those countries that request it, appropriate technical assistance and capacity-building are available to make most effective use of the IP system.

j)

New global multi-stakeholder partnerships need to be designed, emphasizing the role of scientists and academics as essential for the post-2015 development agenda and promoting the development and sharing of innovations for the benefit of all.28 These partnerships should embrace the principles of open access to data and knowledge, as well as looking at STI streams that contribute to enhancing the life of people at all social levels. This includes partnerships with economic actors at different scales, including small- and medium-sized enterprises in rural and urban area, South-South and triangular collaboration. Partnerships with local and marginalized communities, including indigenous people, women and youth, should also be pursued. Strengthening science diplomacy provides further opportunities to build scientific cooperation on issues that no single country can address alone.

k)

A data revolution for sustainable development is necessary, and a Global Partnership on Development Data should be established.29 A post-2015 development agenda needs to be grounded on a strong monitoring and evaluation framework. Science can support establishing baselines and development of goals, targets and metrics based on evidence, and can help in assessing progress. Strong statistical capacity at country level and sound data-sharing policies at international level are needed for monitoring progress.

II. Overview of proposals

Several proposals for integrating STI-related targets into the SDGs framework have been made so far. Proposals either put stand-alone goals on S&T forward or propose science- and technology-related targets under other development goals.

A)

One or several SDG(s) on science, technology

and innovation

has(ve) been put forward by:

x Rio+20 Issues Brief 12 (UNCSD Secretariat). Three potential areas for goals were identified: 1. Global technology performance improvement by a factor 4 (i.e. decoupling growth from resource use and environmental degradation); 2. Universal access to sustainable technology; 3. Global green innovation systems for sustainable development, including institutional and input targets such as: global R&D cooperation system; global IPR system; combined public and private investment of at least 2 per cent of GDP in R&D in all countries, and at least 3 per cent in technologically advanced economies; publicly-funded technology, scientific discoveries and creative works made freely available for sustainable development.

B) Inclusion of science and technology aspects under other SDGs. This approach has been proposed by:

x The UN Secretary-General's High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. To include under the illustrative goal 'Create a Global Enabling Environment and Catalyse Long-Term Finance' the following target: 'Promote collaboration on and access to STI and development data'; under the goal 'Create Jobs, Sustainable Livelihoods, and Equitable Growth', a target: 'Strengthen productive capacity by providing universal access to financial services and infrastructure'.

x UN Global Compact. Under the goal 'Modernize infrastructure and technology', the following targets are proposed: 'Deploy investment sufficient to meet requirements for "green" transport, energy and water systems in the developing world, and for upgrading or replacing old and "brown" infrastructure in the developed world'; 'Universal and affordable access to the Internet and computing technology' and 'Step up R&D in both public and private sectors.'

x The UN Broadband Commission proposed the target 'gender equality in broadband access by 2020'.

x The 55th Session of the Commission on the Status of Women recommended to 'set concrete goals, targets and benchmarks [] to achieve equal participation of women and men in decision-making at all levels, especially in S&T institutions [] as well as in the design of S&T policies and research and development agenda setting.'

x The Brookings Institution. Under a goal on 'gender equality', the development of targets for political, scientific, and corporate leadership is suggested and, under a goal on 'global partnership and good governance', the development of ambitious targets for data quality and availability as well as targets for civil society efforts, including scientific "citizen goals".

x The Campaign for People's Goals for Sustainable Development. Under a 'Climate justice and environmental sustainability' goal, a target 'Ensure sharing of safe, appropriate and ecologically sound technologies' is suggested.

x The Center for Global Development. Under an education goal, the need to accelerate progress in math and science skills 'for a productive role in national and global societies' is mentioned.

In addition, many other SDG proposals depend on increased capacities in STI, and on knowledge generation and sharing to achieve the targets set, such as 'monitoring of ocean acidification', as suggested under an ocean SDG30, or 'improving integrated water resources management and water-use efficiency', as suggested under a stand-alone goal on water.31

III. The way forward

The benefit of a stand-alone SDG on 'Harnessing STI for Sustainable Development' is that it would enhance the adoption and operationalization of integrated national STI strategies and action plans for sustainable development and would increase innovation capacities, green technology transfer and scientific capacity-building in developing countries. Mainstreaming STI into other SDGs appears to be a necessary complementary requirement for promoting knowledge-sharing and for building capacity to face the multiple challenges posed by sustainable development. Many statistics and indicators on STI-related issues are available, but they rarely connect or measure the input of STI in achieving development goals. In the light of the complexity of STI, knowledge-sharing and capacity-building and their multiple impacts on and contribution to sustainable development and poverty eradication, a series of goals, targets and indicators could usefully be considered.

On the basis of the proposals made so far and in the light of the challenges and opportunities outlined in this brief, specific goals, targets and indicators32 could be developed around the following priority areas:

x Investment in science, technology and innovation, including investment in R&D, as a percentage of GDP and as a percentage of Official Development Assistance;

x STI policies as holistic frameworks and integral part of national sustainable development policies addressing inter alia the following:

- Increased multi-stakeholder collaboration across the policy-science-industry-society spectrum;

- Human, institutional and societal STI capacity-building, with a strong focus on training and science education at all levels;

- Measurement of innovation capacity across a range of metrics which combine to create national innovation eco-systems;33

- Achieving gender parity in STI systems;

x Level of openness achieved in accessing, sharing, processing and using scientific research and knowledge;

x Inclusive Internet connectivity and use; scaling up of ICTs to spur local innovation;

x Data revolution including solid STI statistics and indicators systems, and adequate capacities for data collection and analysis;

x Regional and international STI cooperation and multi-stakeholder partnerships, in particular South-South and North-South-South;

x New and stronger financing mechanisms at all levels for STI, knowledge and data-sharing, capacity development and green technology transfer;

x Achieving specific resource efficiency/decoupling factors via STI.

32 Indicators tracking goals and targets 'should be disaggregated to ensure no one is left behind and targets

Issues Brief 17: NEEDS OF COUNTRIES IN SPECIAL SITUATIONS - AFRICAN COUNTRIES, LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES, LANDLOCKED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES AND SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES, AS WELL AS THE SPECIFIC CHALLENGES FACING MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES1

Countries in special situations, namely African countries, Least Developed Countries (LDCs), Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs), Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and Middle-Income Countries (MICs), have made significant strides in pursuit of development and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). These countries also face significant challenges that must be overcome in order to achieve inclusive, equitable and sustainable development for all. There is certainly overlap in these categories of countries. For example, Africa is home to LDCs, LLDCs, SIDS and MICs. Most LLDCs are also LDCs and over half of the LDCs and LLDCs are found in Africa. That said, while these countries face similar challenges, each category also faces unique circumstances and concerns that the SDGs should address.

1. African Countries I. Introduction

Africa has experienced unprecedented growth over the past decade. Between 2000 and 2009, eleven African countries grew at an annual rate of 7 per cent or more and Africa's collective GDP at US$2 trillion today is close to Brazil's or Russia's. The business climate on the continent has also improved, with a nascent and growing middle class. While Africa's economic performance has made it an increasingly important player in the global economy, economic, social and environmental indicators show that the continent is still lagging behind on several development fronts, which makes the framing of the SDGs particularly important for the continent.

II. Stocktaking

Progress towards the MDGs and lessons learned

With less than 800 days remaining until the 2015 target date for achieving the MDGs, Africa's progress remains uneven, varying across and within countries as the continent's aggregate performance masks wide income, gender and spatial inequalities. Strong advances have been made on some indicators such as net primary school enrolment, gender parity in primary education, representation of women in decision making, immunization coverage and stemming the spread of HIV/AIDS. In some countries, extreme poverty is not declining fast enough, millions of youth are unemployed, health systems are underdeveloped, and preventable maternal mortality is high. Many countries also face diverse environmental challenges related to climate change, water scarcity, biodiversity and ecosystem loss, deforestation, land degradation, desertification, drought, coastal erosion and low resilience to natural disasters.

Although Africa is the world's second fastest growing region economically, poverty reduction on the continent has lagged behind other regions. While extreme poverty has declined at a faster rate

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. The preparation of this issues brief has been co-led by OSAA and OHRLLS, with contributions from ECA, ECLAC, FAO, IFAD, OCHA, UNCCD, UNEP, UNFF, UNFPA, UNIDO, UNISDR, UN Women, WFP.

since 2005 than it did during the period 1990-2005, the continent's current rate of poverty reduction is not rapid enough to reach the MDG 1 poverty target by 2015. This situation is exacerbated in Sub-Saharan Africa by persistent food insecurity, evidenced by a high prevalence of hunger and malnutrition, particularly amongst children, that puts the MDG 1 hunger target out of reach. With more than 220 million undernourished in Sub-Saharan Africa, one in four people still experience chronic hunger. The continent as a whole also faces drastic demographic shifts, with a fast growing population that is the youngest in the world. Underlying opportunities in this demographic window are accompanied by significant risks, mainly represented by rising rates of youth unemployment and resulting social instability.

Although maternal deaths in the region have fallen by more than 40% since the 1990s, and the under-five mortality rate has fallen by 33%, the region faces significant challenges in meeting MDGs 4 and 5 on child mortality and maternal health, respectively, and continues to bear the greatest burden of child and maternal deaths in the world. 440 women die each day in Sub-Saharan Africa due to child birth related complications and nearly two-thirds of women do not have access to family planning services and maternal health care. With regard to MDG 6 on combating HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other diseases, Africa has managed to halt and reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, as well as the spread of malaria and tuberculosis. However, both diseases remain serious health threats, with gender inequality rendering women and adolescent girls particularly vulnerable to, and impacted by, HIV/AIDS. The continent has had mixed progress towards meeting MDG 7 on environmental sustainability. While there has been some progress in limiting CO2 emissions and ozone-depleting substances, the continent has experienced continued loss of forest cover and biodiversity, as well as ongoing difficulties in meeting targets on water and sanitation. Efforts to achieve these goals are hindered by difficulties in meeting Goal 8 on the global partnership for development, as official development assistance to Africa fell to US$ 28.9 billion in 2012, a decline of 9.9 percent, in real terms, from 2011 levels.

In addition to targets at risk of not being met, some targets en route to being met are still a cause for concern. Africa is expected to meet MDG 2, for example, with most African countries having achieved universal primary enrolment with rates above 90 percent. However, quality of education, including focus on a safe and healthy learning environments, learning outcomes and skills for jobs, life and citizenship, remains a challenge as the continent contends with low completion rates, high rates of grade-repetition, and disparities in access to education between rich and poor, and urban and rural children. In addition, while the continent is making great strides towards MDG 3 on gender equality and women's empowerment, early marriage, household power dynamics and low economic opportunities for women are slowing progress.

The MDGs mainly focused on social issues without addressing the interrelated problems of population dynamics, inequality, unemployment, low economic development and lack of access to social safety nets. In addition, Africa's infrastructure deficit remains one of the most significant barriers to sustaining the continent's growth, cutting national economic growth by approximately two percentage points every year and reducing productivity by as much as 40 per cent.

New and Emerging Challenges

New and emerging challenges that straddle the peace and development divide pose challenges to good economic and political governance and sustainable development in Africa. The institutional tendency to address these issues in silos fails to account for the cross-sectoral and integrated nature of these matters. For example, climate change, deforestation, desertification, land degradation, drought, and low resilience to natural hazards and the impact of disasters affect many communities' social and economic well-being. In addition, the continent's development efforts are hampered by energy poverty, difficulties in technology transfer, dependency on extractive industries, unsustainable production and consumption patterns, low penetration of ICT services, inadequate infrastructure, and weak institutional capacity. Non-inclusive economic growth and rapid population growth accelerated by lack of access to reproductive health services have fuelled high levels of migration, urbanization, youth unemployment, and ongoing food and health insecurity.

Political instability and recurrent conflicts have also hampered the continent's development efforts. While the majority of African countries have been experiencing a period of stability, there have been significant setbacks in several countries in North and Sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, lack of adequate income and economic prospects has been closely linked to an explosion in urban crime, including gang activity and organized crime. Indeed, human and drug trafficking, piracy and terrorism have emerged as key challenges on the continent. These challenges reflect the complex nexus between peace, security and development as well as the need for a holistic and comprehensive approach to addressing them.

III. Overview of proposals

During the July 2012 African Union Summit, leaders mandated the African Union Commission, along with the African Development Bank, the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and the United Nations Development Programme to support efforts to develop an African common position on the post-2015 development agenda through extensive consultations with all stakeholders in the region. A key outcome of the consultations was a decision by the African Union Heads of State in May 2013 to establish a High-Level Committee to deepen consensus and advocacy for an African Common Position on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.

Overall, African stakeholders have called for an agenda that reflects the priorities of the African Union's New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) under four broad development outcomes:

(i) Structural economic transformation and inclusive growth: Stakeholders stressed the importance of sustainable and inclusive growth, highlighting the need to accelerate the pace and diversify the sources of the continent's economic growth as well as the need to reduce inequality, promote decent jobs and prioritize people-centred growth for the poor as well as for marginalized and vulnerable groups.

(ii) Innovation and technology transfer: Stakeholders recognised the importance of technology and called for technology transfer, funding for innovation systems, research and development, enhanced utilization of ICT and strengthening of science in school curricula.

(iii) Human development: The consultations highlighted the importance of human development as a foundation for the post-2015 development agenda. Stakeholders called for the eradication of poverty in all its forms and the empowerment of women and girls and vulnerable groups to be a primary focus of the agenda.

(iv) Financing and partnerships: The consultations highlighted the importance of partnerships and emphasised the need to ensure ownership, coherence and alignment of international support with national and regional priorities, as well as the need to promote public-private partnerships and South-South cooperation.

x In addition to the priority areas highlighted above, participants in the consultations identified key development enablers as pre-requisites for the post-2015 development agenda: Peace and security x Good governance, transparency and fighting corruption

x Strengthened institutional capacity

x Promoting equality and access to justice and information

x Human rights for all

x Gender equality

x Domestic resource mobilisation

x Regional integration

x A credible participatory process with cultural sensitivity

x Enhanced statistical capacity to measure progress and ensure accountability

x Prudent macro-economic policy that emphasises fair growth

x Democratic and developmental state

IV. The way forward

Africa needs to transform its economies to create wealth, strengthen its productive capacities, and minimize inequalities by promoting social safety nets as well as inclusive growth that creates employment and livelihood opportunities (especially for the continent's women and youth), eradicates hunger and malnutrition and promotes overall human development. Africa needs sustainable, inclusive and equitable economic development driven by industrialization and manufacturing through value-addition to products (including agriculture and minerals), innovative partnerships, infrastructure development (including improved access to energy), and strengthened international cooperation.

Special attention should be given to means of implementation such as innovative financing, trade, aid and development effectiveness, investment, technology transfer, capacity development, regional integration, globalization and trade, and increasing Africa's voice and participation in global governance. In addition, more focus should be given to Africa and the implementation of previously agreed commitments related to its development needs, including the Millennium Declaration, the MDGs, the Monterrey Consensus, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation and the 2005 World Summit Outcome, the 2008 Doha Declaration on Financing for Development, the 2008 Political Declaration on Africa's development needs, as well as the Rio+20 Outcome Document.

2. Least Developed Countries (LDCs) I. Introduction

Established in 1971 by the General Assembly, the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) are recognized by the international community as "the poorest, most vulnerable and weakest countries".2 It is the only group of countries which is subject to a technical review by the Committee for Development Policy, a subsidiary body of the United Nations Economic and Social Council, for inclusion in and graduation from the list of LDCs.3 The Fourth UN Conference on LDCs declared that "we collectively commit to finding lasting solutions to the complex and mutually exacerbating challenges and problems of the least developed countries."4 The Conference adopted the Istanbul Programme of Action (IPoA) for LDCs for the Decade 2011-20.

2 Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-20, para 8. Also the

Other UN Conferences and Summits in the areas of socio-economic and environmental spheres also accord special priority to LDCs. For example, the Rio Principle 6 clearly articulates that the situation and needs of the LDCs shall be given special priority. Paragraph 181 of the Rio+20 Outcome states, "we agree to effectively implement the Istanbul Programme of Action and to fully integrate its priority areas into the present framework for action, the broader implementation of which will contribute to the overarching goal of the Istanbul Programme of Action of enabling half the least developed countries to meet the criteria for graduation by 2020." In paragraph 34 of the Rio+20 outcome, the international community commits to assist LDCs with the implementation of the IPoA as well as in their efforts to achieve sustainable development.

II. Emerging challenges and lessons learned

Over the years, despite improved socio-economic performance by LDCs, the gap between these countries and the rest of the world has widened. For example none of the LDCs have been able to meet all the MDGs, indicating that LDCs as a group have been left behind in the implementation of the MDGs. Their marginalization is also reflected in their minuscule shares in world trade and global FDI flows. Going forward, the development challenges of the LDCs, therefore, should be at the front and centre of the attention of the international community. This can be done only when poverty eradication, economic transformation and sustainability are holistically addressed.

Average GDP of LDCs expanded by only 4% in 20115 and an estimated 3.3% in 2012, compared with the annual average growth rate of 7.3% achieved from 2001 to 20106. This sluggish growth was primarily caused by the global economic and financial crises and was compounded by dwindling external support, which put the hard earned gains of the LDCs at high risk. Though LDCs projected growth recovery for 2013 and 2014 is inspiring, it is still far from the IPoA target of 7%.

The lack of access to energy remains a major impediment to the sustainable development of LDCs, as it exacerbates the vulnerability of the chronically poor and constrains their productive capacity. In LDCs, 79% of the population lacked access to electricity while 91% had no access to modern fuels. Furthermore, the state of science, technology and innovation in LDCs remains poor. Only 0.5% of the world's researchers live in LDCs and 0.4% of the world's scientific publications originate in the LDCs.7

Though the poverty reduction target of the MDGs has been achieved globally, in LDCs, more than 47 % of the population is still living in extreme poverty. The population of LDCs is expected to nearly double to 1.67 billion between now and 2050. Although the LDCs contain only 12% of the world population, they will account for almost 40% of the global population growth during the next forty years. An ILO study suggests that LDCs need a rate of employment growth of 7% to achieve MDG 1, against the growth of 2.9% per annum over the years 2000-09. It is important to note that adjusted for population and environmental effects, the real growth rate of LDCs in 2000-2008 was almost merely 2.5 percent, almost half the rate as in other developing countries8.

While primary school enrolment rates across the LDCs have increased from 57 to 79 per cent during the period 1999-2008, LDCs are not on track to achieve universal primary education by 2015. More than 40 per cent of adults in LDCs lack literacy skills. 69 per cent of LDCs have yet to reach gender parity in primary education.

5 State of the LDC economies 2013, OHRLLS 6 Report of the Secretary-General on the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed

CO2 emissions per capita of LDCs remained constant at 0.2 per cent, yet they are disproportionally exposed to the impacts of environmental degradation, climate change and disasters and remain the least equipped to deal with them. Soil erosion, land degradation, deforestation, bio-diversity loss, waste management and ecosystem, drought, tropical cyclones and floods are major challenges, which could be further compounded by the potentially negative effects of climate change, including sea-level rise, melting of glaciers and coastal erosion. With their low-carbon profile, rich natural assets and early stage of structural transformation, LDCs, with appropriate support from their development partners, are well positioned to jump start the transition to a green economy growth path.

Average gross domestic savings in the LDCs increased from 18.3% in 2010 to 19.7% in 2011. However, ODA as a percentage of the gross national income (GNI) of donors fell to 0.10% in 2011 from 0.11% in 2010 and is estimated to have declined further in 2012. However, a number of donors have already met the ODA targets of MDG8 and the IPoA. FDI inflows to LDCs, following a decline during the global economic crises, increased to $26 billion in 2012 against $21 billion in 2011.9 LDC exports also witnessed a strong 23.9% growth in 2011 reaching a level of US$230 billion.10 LDCs' exports to developing economies expanded more than seven-fold to represent 52% of their total exports in 2011 - up from 40% in 2000, primarily driven by the exports of primary commodities.

As the United Nations expand its global development agenda with integrated and holistic sustainable development agenda, the financing gap coupled with capacity and institutional constraints are major barriers to the development of LDCs.

III. The way forward

SDGs should continue to have extreme poverty eradication as a core and overarching objective. For sustainable development to be successful in LDCs, it should firmly integrate inclusive and sustained economic growth that is based on structural transformation and creation of productive jobs. LDCs should pursue a sustainable development agenda that ensures the protection and regeneration of their natural assets, on which they are directly dependent. Furthermore, a sustainable development agenda must be based on the Rio Principle 6 and the prioritisation of support to LDCs to diversify their economies and gradually transit to green technologies. Therefore, SDGs should accelerate the progress made in MDGs, integrate IPoA priorities and Rio+20 objectives in a seamless and inclusive manner. The SDGs should integrate the priority areas of the IPoA and provide for clear means of implementation, especially in the areas of mobilizing financial resources, including domestic resources, ODA and investment; international trade; and access to and transfer of technology. Thus, the SDGs need to integrate the following issues:

Structural transformation through productive capacity building: Special priority should be accorded to building a critical mass of viable and competitive productive capacity in agriculture, manufacturing and services; diversification and structural transformation; infrastructure development especially sustainable energy and enhanced investment. Technological innovation and technology transfer to LDCs should be an important area of focus. The IPoA initiative on establishing a Technology Bank dedicated to LDCs is critical in implementing this goal and should be operationalized expeditiously.11

9 World Investment Report, 2013, UNCTAD 10 Note by the WTO Secretariat on market access for products and services of export interest to LDCs, 1

Agriculture, food security and rural development: Revitalization and diversification of agricultural production in LDCs are vitally important. The IPoA accords special emphasis on increasing agricultural productivity, food and nutritional security and rural development. LDCs and their development partners should explore the feasibility, effectiveness and administrative modalities of a system of stockholding in dealing with humanitarian food emergencies and fragile recovery situations. Further attention should be provided to the benefits of natural ecosystems, including forests, as a basis for ensuring food security and rural development.

Trade: LDCs and their development partners have set an ambitious goal of doubling the share of LDCs' exports in global exports by 2020. The development partners have agreed to realize timely implementation of duty-free quota-free market access, on a lasting basis, for all LDCs, with simple, transparent and predictable rules of origin; and the reduction or elimination of arbitrary or unjustified non-tariff barriers and other trade-distorting measures. Development partners also agreed to enhance the share for LDCs of the Aid for Trade resources and increase support for the Enhanced Integrated Framework. LDCs also need assistance to better integrate themselves into global value chains by ensuring an open and transparent trade regime.

Commodities: The IPoA calls for reducing commodity dependence in LDCs including through the diversification of their export base through ensuring value addition and increasing value retention. Development partners' commitment to assist LDCs to better mitigate and manage the risks associated with commodity price volatility and to pursue policy options to reduce such volatility should be fully implemented. There should be corporate transparency and accountability of companies, including through the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiatives (EITI).

Human and social development: The IPoA makes strong commitments towards attaining the MDGs by 2015 and making further significant progress beyond 2015 in the areas of education and training, population and primary health care, youth development, shelter, water and sanitation, gender equality and empowerment of women, and social protection. In the IPoA, development partners have agreed to resist the imposition of unreasonable restrictions on labour migration and developing short-term migration. Effective implementation of this commitment will have a salutary effect on human resource development in LDCs, as well as their external earnings.

Multiple crises and other emerging challenges: The continued vulnerability of LDCs to economic shocks and natural and man-made disasters require a renewed focus on building resilience at local, national and regional levels. LDCs should be fully supported in their efforts to strengthen and build their institutions and national facilities for crisis mitigation and resilience.

Environmental degradation and climate change: Despite ever-growing urbanisation, over two thirds of the population in LDCs still live in rural areas, where land is usually the sole asset of the poor. It is important to ensure that the challenges mentioned before are fully acknowledged and strong support mechanisms are put in place to address them. Development partners have agreed to promote and facilitate clean development mechanism projects in LDCs and to respond to the needs of people affected and displaced as a result of extreme weather events, which should also be realized in an adequate and timely manner. Increased efforts are therefore needed to reduce their vulnerabilities, disaster risk and losses as well as to implement the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015 and its successor.

Mobilizing financial resources for development and capacity-building: LDCs are committed to creating a conducive domestic environment, including domestic resource mobilisation while donors reconfirmed their commitments to ensure the fulfilment of all ODA commitments to LDCs.

Implementation of this commitment warrants swift reversal of the recent declines in ODA, further enhancement of ODA flows, quality and development effectiveness, direct ODA to key priorities of the IPoA, especially in the area of productive capacity building. It is therefore important that besides meeting the targets of ODA, the partners should also clearly point out the direction of enhancing the share of ODA going to LDCs in the next decade. This would be in line with the IPoA and the Rio+20 as well.

Furthermore, there is a need to urgently act on the agreement in the IPoA to provide specific debt relief measures for LDCs which are not HIPC as well as temporary debt standstills between debtors and all creditors. Development partners have also agreed to adopt investment promotion regimes, which needs to be materialized. LDCs also need support to mobilize additional private financial flows. Lowering the costs of migration and remittances can further accelerate the flow of resources to LDCs.

Good governance at all levels: The LDCs committed to continue reforming institutional, legal and regulatory frameworks as well as the public sector to increase the efficiency and transparency of service delivery, including the fight against corruption. Development partners, on the other hand, have committed to support these efforts especially by providing LDCs with timely information on annual ODA commitments and disbursements, promoting policy coherence and coordination of international financial, trade and development institutions, and harmonizing and aligning assistance with national priorities of LDCs.

The IPoA also reflects the new realities that emerged in international economic relations. Developing countries have made a commitment to support the development of LDCs within the framework of South-South cooperation as a complement to North-South cooperation. As the challenges and opportunities are multiplying in the next decade and the development agenda is being holistic, a multistakeholder approach to sustainable development will be critical. Therefore, giving due priority to LDCs in accessing innovative financing as well as resources from foundations, private investments, and support from the civil society would be crucial as a complement to ODA.

National leadership and ownership: Sustainable development demands strong national ownership, the right policy framework and a visionary approach from all but particularly from the national leadership. This will need capacity enhancement of the national policy making bodies as well as implementing agencies and institutions.

Monitoring and data: Strong support for developing a robust monitoring mechanism with strengthening of national statistical capacity will be vitally important for LDCs. Full support to further develop their capabilities should be prioritized.

3. Landlocked Developing Countries I. Introduction

The Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs) face special challenges that are linked to their geography, including remoteness from major international markets, inadequate transport infrastructure and high transport and transaction costs. As a consequence, many LLDCs find themselves marginalized from the world economy, cut-off from the global flows of knowledge, technology, capital and innovations, and unable to benefit substantially from external trade. This affects their development prospects, including sustained economic growth, poverty reduction and the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.

The United Nations Millennium Declaration recognised the special needs of LLDCs in its paragraph 18: "We recognize the special needs and problems of the landlocked developing countries, and urge both bilateral and multilateral donors to increase financial and technical assistance to this group of countries to meet their special development needs and to help them overcome the impediments of geography by improving their transit transport systems." The Almaty Programme of Action - the first international partnership framework aimed at supporting the LLDCs to address their special needs- was subsequently adopted at the First United Nations Conference held in 2003 in Almaty, Kazakhstan. The UN General Assembly has also consistently recognized the need to address the special challenges of the LLDCs in the outcome of the 2005 and 2010 World Summits on the MDGs where they called for the full, timely and effective implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action.

II. Assessment of recent developments

Although the LLDCs have made some progress in their development performance since the Millennium Declaration in 2000 and the adoption of the Almaty programme of action in 2003, it is clear that much remains to be done to assist them to achieve sustainable and inclusive economic growth that delivers decent jobs, accelerates poverty reduction and leads to the achievement of higher levels of wellbeing of their people on a sustained and sustainable basis. The group achieved higher annual rates of economic growth, which averaged 6.6% between 2003 and 2007 but slowed down to 3.6% in 2009 because of the global financial and economic crisis. While their average growth rate in 2011 was 6.0%, half of the LLDCs recorded a growth rate of less than 5%. In addition, 19 out of the world's 31 LLDCs have a low per capita GDP of less than US$1,000 in real terms.

On the social development front, although LLDCs have experienced a positive trend in the Human Development Index between 2003 and 2011 and have made advances on some MDGs in particular primary education and reducing HIV and AIDS prevalence rates, much more needs to be done. Poverty levels are still high and progress is also slow on reducing hunger, child and maternal mortality, and improving access to sanitation. In addition, wide and growing income inequalities in LLDCs are undermining efforts to reduce poverty and to achieve the MDGs.

The share of LLDCs in world trade has improved since 2003 and the value of their merchandise exports in nominal terms increased from US $33 billion in 2003 to US $224 billion in 2011. However, when compared to the world's total merchandise and services exports, LLDCs account for a very low proportion of only 1.17% showing the marginalization of the LLDCs from global markets. Furthermore LLDCs heavily rely on natural resource-based commodities thereby making them highly vulnerable to commodity price fluctuations. Whilst the export concentration ratios for other developing countries have remained relatively stable below 0.15, since 2000, they have dramatically increased for the LLDCs from 0.17 in 2000 to 0.38 in 2011.

Transport costs are still very high and have on average increased in LLDCs. According to the World Bank's Doing Business 2013 Report, the average costs of exporting a container for LLDCs increased from US$ 2200 in 2006 to US$ 3000 in 2013, while transit developing countries are only paying 50 percent of this cost. These high transport costs and trade transaction costs continue to constitute the greatest impediment to LLDCs' trade competitiveness, equitable access to global markets and the overall welfare of the people.

Other challenges faced by LLDCs include limited productive capacities, non-tariff barriers, high vulnerability to external and internal shocks and limited market access for some of their products. Total value addition from agriculture for LLDCs declined from 22.8 per cent in 2001 to 18.2 per cent in 2011. Value

addition from manufacturing

has also been on the decline. The manufacturing value added -a basic indicator of the level of industrialization- has declined from a peak of 18.1 per cent in 1992 to 11.5 per cent in 2011.

III. Priority Areas for LLDCs for integration into the Sustainable Development Goals and Post 2015 Development Agenda

In view of the structural and economic challenges manifested by the LLDCs, the following are priority areas that need to be integrated in the SDGs and Post 2015 Development either as goals or targets.

Social development: It is important to retain all the current MDGs on social development, as they are still relevant to the LLDCs. A development agenda that supports LLDCs' efforts in job creation and attaining employment-intensive growth is critical. Reducing all major forms of inequalities should be an integral part of the goals. The targets should include improving access to affordable and nutritious food and, to basic social protection for all poor and vulnerable people. Gender equality is important for poverty reduction and for addressing inequalities, and should be maintained.

Transport and transit infrastructure: Accelerated reduction of the high transport and trade transaction costs for LLDCs is vital. The development agenda should ensure that the LLDCs are supported to establish efficient transit transport systems through increased investments into transit transport, energy and information and communications technology infrastructure and border crossing projects. This is important to improve efficiency and lower time and cost of transport for LLDCs and will help them to reap the full benefits from international trade.

Enhancing trade, trade competitiveness and trade facilitation: Greater integration of LLDCs in world trade and into global value chains is vital for their economic development. Increased market access is important for significantly increasing the share of LLDCs' in world trade. Increased support to assist LLDCs to diversify their production and export base is essential. Enhanced trade facilitation is vital if LLDCs are to reap the full benefits of international trade. The successful conclusion of the Doha Round with favourable outcomes is necessary. In particular, the outcome should fulfil the objective of lowering transaction costs by, inter alia, reducing transport time and enhancing certainty in trans-border trade. Provision of technical assistance and support for capacity building remains vital in enabling LLDCs and transit countries to fully participate in and benefit from multilateral trade negotiations and effectively implement policies and regulations aimed at facilitating transport and trade.

Structural transformation enhanced productive capacities and building resilience to shocks: LLDCs need to achieve structural transformation, which is at the heart of a dynamic and sustainable economic growth process. While international support and cooperation can help shore up internal shortcomings and weaknesses, it is simply not sustainable in the long run. Structural transformation with an emphasis on industrialization, value-addition, value chains and institutional and human capacity development is very important. Enhanced development of human skills and education in particular post-primary education are critical for improving the services and industrial sectors as well as spurring technological innovation in LLDCs - these need to be reflected in the new goals. Capacity building on the mechanisms to foster population resilience is a core element of this deep transformation that allows people to overcome shocks.

Regional integration: Regional cooperation, including trade integration, and transit cooperation, can facilitate LLDCs integration into the global trading system by, inter alia, increasing the size of markets, improving their competitiveness, and enhancing regional connectivity and intra-regional trade. It is important that the post 2015 development agenda promotes more harmonized and effective regional and sub-regional integration.

Private sector development: A vibrant and competitive private sector capable of boosting diversification, stimulating job creation, driving innovation, and fostering integration into global markets is essential to support LLDCs. A sustainable development agenda that supports a development framework that underpins an operating environment conducive to responsible private sector growth and development, namely: peace and stability, the rule of law, good governance, accountability and transparency, absence of corruption, adequate infrastructure, an educated workforce, clear property rights and enforceable contracts. It should also strengthen the capacity of the private sector, including SMEs to address their financial, technical and technology gaps, promote innovation and management skills, access to production infrastructure and utilities, as well as knowledge of and access to markets.

Climate change, desertification and land degradation: Since LLDCs face particular vulnerabilities to climate change and desertification, it is important that the new development framework includes a goal which addresses climate change, desertification, land degradation and droughts. LLDCs require support in the form of financial and technical assistance for climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction, and support to address deforestation, desertification and land degradation.

Means of implementation: The partnership goal should provide LLDCs with resources for implementation and with increased market access. It should include targets on: increased ODA; increased aid for trade; increased market access; technical assistance and capacity building support; increased FDI; strengthened South-South cooperation; and increased technology transfer.

4. Small Island Developing States (SIDS) I. Introduction

Small Island Developing States (SIDS) are a 'special case' in terms of their environment and development. They are ecologically fragile and vulnerable. Their small size, limited resources, geographic dispersion and isolation from markets; place them at an economic disadvantage, including challenges to develop economies of scale. For SIDS the ocean and coastal environment is of strategic importance and constitutes a valuable development resource. Their geographic isolation has resulted in their habitation of a comparatively large number of unique species of flora and fauna, giving them a very high share of global biodiversity. They also have rich and diverse cultures with special adaptations to island ecosystems and knowledge of the sound management of island natural resources. SIDS face all the environmental problems and challenges of coastal zones, concentrated in a limited land area. They are located among the most vulnerable regions in the world in relation to the intensity and frequency of natural hazards. SIDS are on the frontlines in terms of experiencing the impacts of climate change. These challenges are causing major set-backs to their socio-economic development. SIDS lack the capacity to address these challenges themselves and rely on the support of and partnership with the international community to realize their sustainable development objectives. SIDS' small and open economies leave them especially exposed and highly vulnerable to external shocks. The increased indebtedness and constrained fiscal space can have long-term developmental consequences. Many SIDS are dependent on their narrow resource bases with little space for diversification.

II.

Emerging challenges and lessons learned

Many SIDS are heavily dependent on fossil fuel for their energy needs. As much as 15 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) can be expended on energy imports with electricity costing USD 2.50 per unit, among the highest costs per unit in the world. The increasing cost of imported fossil fuels represent a major impediment to the achievement of sustainable development and poverty eradication in SIDS as scarce financial resources are diverted from efforts to promote social and economic development and ensure environmental sustainability. In recognition of this SIDS have themselves pledged to increase their renewable energy components in the energy mix with a couple committing to 100% renewable energy generation by 2020.

The growing interest in sea-bed mining in a number of SIDS further provides opportunities for their economic growth but at the same time poses a number of challenges to protecting SIDS marine environment from potential degradation. The vital tourism industry in SIDS, which in many SIDS is the largest employer, is very much dependent on healthy coastal marine environments. It is therefore fundamental to continue to promote sustainable practices in the tourism industry. Adequate policy and legal measures that strike a balance between utilization of natural resources for economic benefit, including marine resources, and environmental protection in SIDS need to be strengthened.

Several SIDS are classified as middle-income countries thus limiting their access to concessional financial resources. A number of SIDS have in the recent past registered debt to GDP ratios in excess of 100 percent. For some SIDS, high public debt levels have been a persistent and unresolved problem with some recently experiencing rapid debt accumulation.

With regard to MDGs, over the past decade, SIDS have made some progress towards achieving the MDGs, though less than other developing countries. In addition, much of this growth was jobless and their economic diversification has been mostly stagnant over the last three decades. Thus their production and export structure is still highly concentrated, they are highly dependent on aid and their marginalization in the global economy is exacerbated by their geographical handicaps, including small size, remoteness and their isolation from major international markets and prohibitive trade transaction costs. SIDS have made good progress in the areas of gender, health and certain educational and environmental goals. However, they have made less progress than most other groupings, or even regressed in economic terms, especially in terms of poverty reduction and debt sustainability, a result of low growth.

Gains made by SIDS toward attaining sustainable development could all come to nought if the climate change challenge is not comprehensively addressed. The 2012 World Bank Report Turn Down the Heat, warns that if current commitments and pledges are not fully realised, a warming of 4C could occur as early as the 2060s and associated sea-level rise of 0.5 to 1 meter or more by 2100 will threaten the very existence of entire countries and many SIDS. A similarly dire warning is found in UNEP's 2012 Third Emissions Gap Report indicating that without action, emissions are likely to reach 58 Gigatonnes (Gt) by 2020.The report also warns that to stay within the 2C limit which has been called for by SIDS, global emissions will need to peak before 2020 and then drop sharply thereafter.

The report of the Working Group 1 contributing to the Fifth Assessment Report, stated that global mean sea level will continue to rise during the 21st century . Under all 'Representative Concentration Pathway' scenarios the rate of sea level rise will very likely exceed that observed during 1971-2010 due to increased ocean warming and increased loss of mass from glaciers and ice sheets12. The report further stated that sea level rise will not be uniform. By the end of the 21st century, it is very likely that sea level will rise in more than about 95% of the ocean area. About 70% of the coastlines worldwide are projected to experience sea level change within 20% of the global

12 Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, Summary for Policymakers, SPM-18 mean sea level change.13 With these projections it can be assumed that many SIDS, particularly low-lying atolls, will be severely affected.

Ocean acidity has increased by 26% since the beginning of the industrial revolution and the rate of acidification is expected to accelerate in coming decades in any 'business as usual' scenario for CO2 emissions.14 Further monitoring and research is needed to make better projections of the acidification and its impact. Capacity-building activities directed towards SIDS to mitigate the impacts of ocean acidification will be crucial to ensuring, inter alia, food and nutrition security and securing sustainable alternatives to fishing to supply both income and adequate nutrition.

III.

The way forward

The implementation of the BPOA and MSI over the last two decades has seen important lessons

learnt in the value of SIDS-SIDS cooperation and partnerships with development partners.

Partnerships no matter how big or small should continue to provide an important platform through

which SIDS proceed towards achieving their sustainable development objectives. There remains the

need however, for an effective mechanism to support SIDS-SIDS cooperation.

The following areas need high attention in designing the SDGs:

Sustainable energy: The Barbados Declaration on Achieving Sustainable Energy for All in SIDS

emphasized that there are commercially feasible options for providing energy such as wind, solar,

geothermal, and ocean energy, and that many SIDS are particularly suited to these options because

of their geographical location. Access to these technologies however remains a major challenge for

SIDS and the international community particularly developed countries must ensure the provision of

financial resources, technology transfer and capacity building in SIDS to ensure the realization of

utilizing renewable energy resources. Given the interdependence of various sectors such as water,

food and agriculture, eradicating poverty and improving livelihoods with access to sustainable

energy, the issue of developing viable renewable energy resources remains a high priority for SIDS

and the promotion of renewable energy technology should be pursued in the SDGs and post-2015

development agenda.

Oceans: For many SIDS the oceans and its vast resources is the firm basis upon which jobs and economic growth depend. The potential that sectors based on the ocean and its resources holds for economic growth through sectors such as tourism, fisheries and appropriate aquaculture will need to be unlocked- with right policy frameworks. In the Pacific SIDS region license fees collected from Distant Water Fishing Nations provide some 3 to 40% of government revenue. Fish provides 50 to 90% of animal protein of many SIDS where consumption is typically three to four times the global average. SIDS food security depends on the health of the oceans. In terms of livelihood, 47% of households in Pacific SIDS derive their first or second income from catching and selling fish. The need to enhance marine scientific research and technology capacities for SIDS to support policy making is key. Coastal areas and marine resources are of substantial cultural and historic significance to the communities that inhabit and use them. Promoting connectivity through enhancing marine transportation and ICTs along with appropriate regional integration measures are other important avenues that can better enhance sustainable development in SIDS. As such the health of the oceans is vital to SIDS, and not only to SIDS but to the global community as well. Ocean and seas should be integrated into the SDGS, whether in the form of a dedicated SDG on oceans or cross-cutting targets.

13

Non-communicable diseases: They constitute a major obstacle for the achievement of sustainable development in SIDS and thus assistance is needed from the international community for SIDS to develop and implement comprehensive strategies to address this issue. Increased capacity and institutional strengthening will be a major requirement in preventing epidemics resulting from NCDs in SIDS.

Climate change and sea level rise: This will continue to be the most serious threat to SIDS in their pursuit of sustainable development with impacts in some cases - especially low-lying islands-affecting the very survival of SIDS. The international community must undertake greater political commitment to the UNFCCC processes in addressing the adaptation needs of SIDS including the provision of new, additional and predictable financial resources. Likewise, the Secretary-General's Climate Change Summit in 2014 will provide an important avenue to increase mitigation measures that would ensure minimal impacts on SIDS. Also of importance to SIDS will be the full operationalisation and capitalization of the Green Climate Fund by early 2014 with the need to scaleup financing to reach USD 100 billion by 2020. Strengthened research and knowledge exchange for policy and decision-making is needed.

Building resilience: In the Caribbean and Pacific islands, more than 50% of the population lives within 1.5 kilometres from the coast.15 On average, almost 30% of SIDS population reside in areas between the sea level and five meters above sea level16. Given their small size, the expected annual average losses from earthquakes and tropical cyclone wind damage in SIDS represent respectively only 2 per cent and 1.4 per cent of the global total. However, precisely because they are small, 8 of the 10 countries that would lose the largest proportion of the value of their produced capital stock in a one-in-250 year earthquake are SIDS. In the case of a one-in-250 year cyclone, SIDS comprise 6 of the 10 countries most at risk.17 SIDS, with low levels of investment and high average annual losses, are less likely to be able to absorb losses, even from more frequent, less severe events. Jamaica observed annual average losses between 1991 and 2011 equivalent to 2.6 per cent of its average annual investment. This contributed to its sluggish growth over this period.18 Similarly, Vanuatu and Tonga are estimated to sustain average annualised losses at 6.6 and 4.4 per cent, respectively.19 Special consideration should be given to financing for early warning systems along with improved human and institutional capacity for implementing regional and national disaster risk reduction strategies, including research and data collection and analysis. Supporting traditional systems of environmental protection and resource management, is crucial for stronger disaster management strategies and enhanced climate change adaptation and can, in general, also enhance the ecological and social resilience of SIDS and SIDS peoples.

Forests can play a key role in developing the resilience of SIDS against vulnerabilities of different kinds, including climate change. Coastal forests and mangroves have proven to be among the most effective ways of protecting coastlines against sea-level rise while providing local populations with a valuable source of fish. Further inland, forests and fruiting trees (through agro forestry) help maintain the soil in place, protecting mountainous landscapes against erosion and mudslides,

15 A Blueprint for Ocean and Coastal Sustainability, UNESCO, FAO, UNDP, IMO, 2012. 16 The 30% figure used in the sentence is calculated using the World Bank's The Little Data Book on Climate

Change 2011 is a product of the Development Data Group of the Development Economics Vice Presidency, the Environment Department, and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery Group of the World Bank

17 UNISDR (2013) From Shared Risk to Shared Value - The Business Case for Disaster Risk Reduction. 18 UNISDR (2013) From Shared Risk to Shared Value - The Business Case for Disaster Risk Reduction. 19 Jha, Abhas K.; Stanton-Geddes, Zuzana. 2013. Strong, safe, and resilient: s strategic policy guide for disaster

risk management in East Asia and the Pacific. Directions in development; environment and sustainable development. Washington D.C., the World Bank.

especially in the face of extreme weather, while ensuring a domestic source of fruit and reducing dependency on food imports. Finally, forests of all types prevent siltation, thus protecting coastal marine ecosystems, including coral reefs, which constitute the basis for millions of livelihoods across SIDS, whether for fishing or for tourism.

Means of Implementation: For many SIDS, ODA still remains as an important source to support

development. SIDS also look forward to the operationalisation of the Green Climate Fund. FDI in

recent years has been concentrated on only a handful of SIDS and enabling measures that would

contribute to building confidence in SIDS in general that enhance their potential as investment

friendly destinations would need to be promoted. Further, debt sustainability is an issue of great

concern to SIDS, many of whom have some of the highest debt to GDP ratio in the world. These

debts and the burden they place on SIDS have been compounded, in many instances, by the

frequent onset and impact of natural hazards and their costly 'clean-up' and recovery costs as well

as the high transaction costs inherent in many SIDS. As such a holistic approach to the means of

implementation that is as ambitious as the sustainable development agenda itself should also be

promoted and seriously considered. Sustainable maritime transport should also be considered in this

context.

5. Middle-Income Countries

I. Introduction

Middle income countries (MICs) are a diverse group by size, population and income level, and are home to 5 of the world's 7 billion people and 74% of the world's population. According to the World Bank's classification, MICs are defined as having a per capita gross national income of US$1,036 to $12,615. Using this metric, more than half of the world's countries are considered middle-income. MICs thus constitute a large and diverse grouping of countries, with significant distinctions to be found amongst them. They are found in all developing regions of the world, with Latin America and the Caribbean having the highest proportion of MICs worldwide. MICs are also major engines of growth, constituting about 45 per cent of world gross product measured in purchasing power parity terms.

II. Stocktaking

Progress towards the MDGs and lessons learned

While MICs have made uneven progress towards the MDGs, their progress has been remarkable in many respects. As a group, MICs are on track to achieve the MDG 1 target for poverty reduction. But this figure belies a stark change in world poverty - most of the world's poor live not in the poorest countries, but in MICs. According to the Secretary-General's most recent report on "Development cooperation with middle income countries", progress towards the MDG 1 target on hunger has also been mixed, with MICs accounting for 69.6 per cent of global undernourishment. Numerous MICs are close to achieving MDG 2, with the World Bank reporting higher primary enrollment since 2000 and completion has reached highs of more than 90% in Latin America and developing Europe and Central Asia. Despite this progress, a number of countries still face challenges in ensuring primary education on a universal basis.

Although a host of countries have graduated to 'middle income' status in recent years, poor people within these countries have been left behind, with further stark differences remaining between rural and urban sectors. In 1990, 90 per cent of the world's poor lived in poor countries. Today, estimates show that three-quarters of the world's 1.3 billion poor people now live in MICs, with income distribution in MICs tending to be more unequal than in low- and high-income countries. Moreover, MICs continue to face a number of challenges, including widespread poverty; lack of access to basic needs and services; growing environmental pollution and degradation, with significant effects on public health, especially in urban areas with great population density; social constraints such as limitations for women and girls to gain fully equal access to education, training and jobs; malnutrition; high child and maternal mortality; limited or no access to sanitation; lack of capacity to upgrade their manufacturing sectors; and a lack of adequate healthcare systems in numerous countries.

New and Emerging Challenges

At the national level, many middle-income countries face a unique development challenge. Lower-middle-income countries (defined as having per capita gross national income of US$1,036 to US$4,085) often lack economic diversification and, as a result, are particularly vulnerable to external shocks. Furthermore, as countries reach middle-income status, they often encounter 'second generation' challenges that reflect the more advanced stage of their development, including lifestyle diseases, aging populations, pension reform, tertiary education, social inequality, competitiveness, trade and tax policy, financial literacy, green growth, and urbanization. For many MICs, their place in the world economy entails production costs that exceed those of the low-income countries, while their lack of technological competitiveness hinders their capacity to produce higher-value products and therefore keeps them below the ranks of high-income economies. This phenomenon of exhibiting higher costs compared to some countries, while lacking competitiveness in relation to others, effectively traps countries at their current development stage. In addition, MICs comprise 10 of the 20 countries with the highest levels of inequality in the world, a situation that hinders their long-term development.

Aid effectiveness in MICs is also a challenge. In 2012, bilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) to these countries fell by 13 percent, to about US$ 26 billion, creating need for enhanced domestic resource mobilization. Although MICs receive a total of 43% of the total net bilateral ODA, their capacities for redistribution or for coordinating aid efforts may differ. There is no consensus amongst bilateral donors on the appropriate terms and volume of assistance to MICs, or about how best to target and coordinate ODA to reduce poverty and tackle inequality. Some upper middle-income countries (which are defined as having per capita gross national income of US$4,086 to US$12,615), such as China, Brazil and India have recently distinguished themselves as 'emerging partners', providing development aid to other developing countries.

III. Overview of proposals

In June 2013, a High-Level Conference of Middle Income Countries was held in San Jos, Costa Rica, hosted by the Government of Costa Rica and co-organized by the UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). During the conference, a High-Level panel met to address key concerns of MICs and their integration into Post-2015 Development Agenda, culminating in the adoption of the San Jos Declaration in which the Ministers and Heads of Delegations, inter alia:

x Agreed to promote measures and cooperation to advance inclusive and equitable economic growth and prosperity, industrial advancement in the framework of sustainable development, and finance and investment in MICs;

x Emphasized MICs' progress in education, health and social programmes, which requires support from the international community;

x Called on all countries to prevent, mitigate and adapt to the adverse effects of climate change

under the principles of common but differentiated responsibilities;

x Emphasized the role of public-private partnerships and knowledge networking as instruments to meet sustainability challenges, which should be taken into account in the elaboration of the Post-2015 Development Agenda;

x Requested the UN development system, in particular funds and programmes, to consider the San Jos Declaration in future programme decisions, including in the context of the Post-2015 Development Agenda;

IV. The way forward

A significant number of MICs are in economic transition and therefore require unique support to reduce inequalities, as well as to address social imbalances. Relevant MDGs that remain as part of the development agenda should be crafted in a manner that is relevant for MICs and provide coherent support for growth, security and poverty reduction. A more effective development agenda would help countries to deliver both the policies and the institutions necessary to support equitable growth and poverty reduction. It is particularly important that the agenda recognize the vulnerability of many MICs to returning to low-income country status or being stuck in the so-called 'middle-income trap'. More needs to be done to set up e-Governments, support infrastructure development, and foster multi-sectoral approaches to development. Moreover, to increase effectiveness and positive results on monitoring and evaluation, MICs will need support in bridging the technology gap.

MICs are critical drivers of the world economy, with knowledge and resources to share. Given their strengthening economic base, MICs (particularly large emerging economies and upper-middle-income countries) have the potential to make powerful contributions to production of global public goods, including those related to security and climate change. They can and should be powerful forces for stimulating sustainable development, including by supporting other developing countries in achieving SDGs through South-South cooperation, trade and finance, and other means.

References Africa 1) UN Economic Commission for Africa, African Union Commission, African Development Bank & United Nations Development Programme, MDG Report 2013: Assessing Progress in Africa toward the Millennium Development Goals (2013).

2) African Union, Report of the Commission on the Post 2015 Development Agenda: Towards an African Common Position and Modalities for Establishment of a Committee of Heads of State and Government on the Post 2015 Development Agenda, EX.CL/791(XXIII) (2013).

3) UN Economic Commission for Africa and the African Union, Economic Report on Africa (ERA) 2013: Making the Most of Africa's Commodities: Industrializing for Growth, Jobs and Economic Transformation (2013).

4) African Union Commission, UN Economic Commission for Africa, African Development Bank, United Nations Development Programme, Outcome Document of the Regional Consultations on the Post-2015 Development Agenda (2012).

5) UN Economic Commission for Africa, Bridging the means of implementation gap: Key issues for Africa (2012). 6) UN Economic Commission for Africa, New and Emerging Challenges in Africa: Summary Report (2012). 7) OECD, "Aid to poor countries slips further as governments tighten budgets", 3 April 2013. See http://www.oecd.org/newsroom/aidtopoorcountriesslipsfurtherasgovernmentstightenbudgets.htm

Middle Income Countries 1) Millennium Development Goals 2013 Report, United Nations, 2013 2) World Bank, Middle Income Countries Overview (http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/mic/overview) 3) "Attaining the International Development Targets: Will Growth be enough?" Development Policy Review (2012) 4) World Bank World Development Report (2012) 5) Middle-Income Countries High-Level Conference Bulletin (June 2013) http://www.iisd.ca/sd/unido/mics/html/crsvol212num1e.html?&utm_source=www.iisd.ca&utm_medium=feed&utm _content=2013-07-16&utm_campaign=RSS2.0 Retrieved August 2013.

6) Report of the Secretary-General on "Development cooperation with middle-income countries", A/68/265, 5 August 2013.

Issues Brief 18: HUMAN RIGHTS INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO DEVELOPMENT1

I. Stocktaking

The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have had some success in highlighting key development and human rights issues such as poverty and food, gender equality, health, education, water and sanitation, housing and a global partnership for development. However, the focus of the MDGs on a narrow and somewhat unbalanced set of goals failed to reflect the full ambition of the Millennium Declaration and its commitment to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Progress on the goals has been uneven within and across countries, and recent stocktaking exercises have highlighted a number of gaps in what the goals set out to achieve, as well as in the way progress has been measured. Since human rights and sustainable development objectives are closely linked and mutually reinforcing, addressing these human rights gaps will be essential for truly sustainable development.

With regard to socio-economic issues, the MDGs have focused on a selection of issues central to the

human rights agenda in terms of economic, social and cultural rights, but were not fully aligned with

human rights standards. For example, goals focused on achieving access to services, but not on

access to quality services. This is a serious gap and the UN global consultations have detected a

"demand from the ground for a greater emphasis on the quality of basic services - not just access. It

is not just the number of children in schools that matter, but what they are able to learn"2. Ensuring

that public social services are not just accessible but are also of good quality is a central principle of

all economic and social rights, including the right to health, food, education, water and sanitation,

and the right to housing. In the case of the right to education for example, education must be

accessible, affordable and of a quality that ensures minimum learning standards. A human rights

approach to education also means that rights should be integrated throughout the education system

to inculcate the core values of non-discrimination, equality, tolerance and justice in a culturally-

sensitive environment. The issue of jobs, and the right to decent work, have been prominent in

national and global post-2015 consultations. It has been acknowledged that key components of

broad-based, inclusive economic development should include full respect for human rights at work,

labour market policies that promote decent work, and social security guarantees.3

Another gap that the MDGs failed to address is the issue of growing inequalities within and between countries. The UNDG Inequalities Consultation revealed that, by not devoting sufficient attention to inequalities, the MDGs may have exacerbated the relative neglect of marginalized groups and contributed to widening social and economic inequalities. It is now increasingly recognized that, aside from this being undesirable from a moral and legal perspective, the failure to address excessive inequality and discriminatory practices can also inhibit development outcomes. Dismantling discrimination and reducing inequalities is essential for sustainable development. Research on investing in children's rights to health, nutrition, and learning, particularly of those that are most excluded and marginalized, suggests that this is a social and economic investment which

1 This Issue Brief was drafted by OHCHR, UNICEF, UN Women, UNDP and UNEP with comments from the

following agencies: UNESCO, UNAIDS, World Bank, EOSG Rule of Law Unit, PBSO, ILO, UN-DESA, UNFPA, and IOSAA. This Issues Brief complements other Issues Briefs including on Promoting Equality including Social Equity, and Gender Equality.

2 UNDG, The Global Consultation Begins: Emerging Views for a New Development Agenda (2013), "A Million helps reduce the transmission of poverty and inequality from one generation to the next4. Achieving gender equality and realising the rights of women and girls are proven development multipliers5. Yet while MDG 3 does focus explicitly on gender equality, progress is tracked through only three indicators which represent important aspects of gender equality (education, employment and political representation), but are insufficient to achieve the overall goal, as this leaves out crucial aspects of gender-specific discrimination such as violence against women, gender-based wage discrimination, women's disproportionate share of unpaid care work, sexual and reproductive health and rights, women's limited asset and property ownership and unequal participation in decision-making at all levels.

In the context of inequalities, the issue of jobs was again central. Jobs are seen not only as a way out of poverty, but also as giving women and men a sense of self-esteem and dignity, with the absence of job opportunities and exclusion from labour markets increasing inequalities, weakening social cohesion, and diminishing trust in political leadership and democratic institutions. Economic growth is no longer considered sufficient: the quality of growth is key, namely inclusive growth that generates employment and decent work and reduces inequalities, and that is economically, socially and environmentally sustainable.6 Growth will not be sustainable, and peace and security may be further undermined, if horizontal inequalities (ie. deep inequalities between ethnic or other social groups) are not explicitly addressed.7 Constitutional and other legislative guarantees of nondiscrimination, and strong rule of law institutions which empower people to claim their rights, such as through legal aid and legal awareness, are also key for reducing inequalities.

Another important gap that people across the world have highlighted is how the "overall principles and values of the [Millennium] declaration [] disappeared from view as the MDGs gathered pace", leading to the "neglect of civil and political rights and issues such as political participation, personal security and access to justice"8. It has long been accepted that freedom from fear is as important as, and interdependent with, freedom from want9. The Rio Declaration (1992), affirmed in the Rio+20 Outcome Document, stressed that individual participation in decision-making, access to information and to judicial and administrative proceedings, including redress and remedy, are essential enablers for inclusive, sustainable development10. Access to information has subsequently been endorsed on

4 UNICEF (2012), Right in Principle and in Practice: A Review of the Social and Economic Returns to Investing in

Children; UNICEF (2013), UNICEF, Sustainable Development Starts and Ends with Safe, Health and Well-Educated Children; WHO, Women and Children's Health: Evidence of Impact on Human Rights (2013). 5 World Bank, World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development (WDR 2012); Rio+20

Outcome; World Summit Outcomes 2005, 2010; UN Millennium Declaration 2000; Beijing Platform for Action 1995. On measuring inequality of opportunities in access to jobs see WDR 2012, p.138. WDR 2012 sets rights as the foundation (p. 155).

6 "A Million Voices," op cit, pp.11, 125. 7 UNDG, Addressing Inequalities: Synthesis Report of Global Public Consultation (March 2013), at

http://www.worldwewant2015.org/node/299198; Berg & Ostry, Inequality and Unsustainable Growth: Two Sides of the Same Coin? IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/11/08, 8 April 2011; World Bank, World Development Report 2011, pp.75-80.

8 UNDG (2013), "A Million Voices", p. 14. 9 UNDP, Human Development Report 2002: Deepening Democracy in a Fragmented World (2002), UN Task

Team, (2012), "The World We Want", UNDG (2013), UNDG (2013), "A Million Voices". 10 Rio Declaration 1992, Principle 10: "Environmental issues are best handled with participation of all

concerned citizens, at the relevant level. At the national level, each individual shall have appropriate access to information concerning the environment that is held by public authorities, including information on hazardous materials and activities in their communities, and the opportunity to participate in decision-making processes. States shall facilitate and encourage public awareness and participation by making information widely available. Effective access to judicial and administrative proceedings, including redress and remedy, shall be provided." many occasions, but the other two pillars of Rio Principle 10 (access to justice and remedies) have received less attention. Protecting the rule of law and ensuring that people have access to justice (state systems as well as traditional and other non-state justice systems) are essential for development and the achievement of the MDGs.11 The MDGs experience shows that the failure to establish legal frameworks consistent with human rights standards, as well as the existence of democratic, capable and accountable institutions (including an independent justice system) that effectively enforce rules and procedures enable appropriate delivery of social services, can be key factors in countries' failure to meet targets.12 Certain civil and political rights indicators (such as indicator 3.3, the proportion of seats held by women in national parliament) were included in the MDGs. But many others were categorically excluded. All rights have measurable dimensions, as the UNDG consultations and UN Task Team report on Statistics and Indicators now affirm.

The MDGs also aimed to promote international cooperation and MDG 8 represents an important effort to strengthen a global partnership for development. However, the goal has proven weak in terms of accountability, given the fact that its targets are less specific and not time bound, and it falls short of other relevant international commitments. The right to development, agreed by member states in 1986, encompasses all human rights and entails obligations of States towards their own populations.13 It also includes a range of important commitments and obligations to international cooperation and assistance which are not fully reflected in MDG 8. For example, while MDG8 does attempt to address imbalances in the international trade system, it neglects underlying issues such as countries' unequal participation in international institutions, including international financial institutions. In addition, it is based on an outdated model of donor-recipient cooperation and does thus not encourage alternative sources for financing or effective South-South or triangular cooperation. Nor does it engage with the responsibilities of private actors including international corporations.

Finally, it has been widely acknowledged that shortfalls in the MDGs have occurred not because the goals are unreachable or because time is too short but "because of unmet commitments and [] a lack of focus and accountability."14 The MDGs established a framework for accountability through periodic reporting by governments. But this has not proven sufficient. Consultations with over a million people suggest that "a data revolution" and a "transparency revolution" are necessary for an accountability revolution. Ensuring freedom of the media to perform their essential role and the right of the public to have access to information will be critical in this endeavour. Accountability and transparency are key principles of the international human rights regime, and offer guidance on how to ensure effective accountability for the post-2015 agenda.

II. Overview of proposals

The Rio+20 Outcome Document, the report of the SG's High Level Panel, the SG's report and many other key reports over the past year have all noted the importance of ensuring that post-2015 goals (including the SDGs) are consistent with existing international agreements, which include the international human rights and environmental treaty regimes.

11 The UN Millennium Project identified governance failures, including weak rule of law systems, as one four

reasons for the shortcomings in achieving the MDGs. 12 Commission on Legal Empowerment of the Poor, Making the Law Work for Everyone. Volume I, 2008, United

Nations, New York. 13 Declaration on the Right to Development (1986) "development is an inalienable human right by virtue of

which every human person and all peoples are entitled to participate in, contribute to, and enjoy economic, social, cultural and political development, in which all human rights and fundamental freedoms can be fully

In this vein, the Rio+20 Outcome Document reiterated an extensive catalogue of human rights commitments: It recommended that SDGs should be "consistent with international law" (which includes international human rights law) and highlighted a number of specific human rights, including the right to an adequate standard of living, the right to food, the right to water and sanitation, the right to health, the right to education, the right to development, the right to personal security, all human rights in the context of sexual and reproductive health, the right to decent work including fundamental rights at work, gender equality, and the right to self-determination. It also integrated key elements of the human rights-based approach to development, as defined by the United Nations system, including people-centred development, a development centred on culture and identity that respects and incorporates traditional knowledge, attention to root causes, broad public participation, inclusion, accountability, non-discrimination, reducing inequalities, empowerment, the rule of law, democracy, personal security, good governance, access to justice, access to information, an active role for civil society, social protection floors, and effective international cooperation. People across the world have since confirmed the importance of the Rio+20 human rights consensus. The most consistent message that has emerged from the post-2015 global consultations so far is people's "demand that this new agenda be built on human rights, and universal values of equality, justice and security"15.

Some proposals for the post-2015 agenda, such as that of the SDSN and the UN Global Compact, have thus advocated for a self-standing goal, or goals, on human rights. But most proposals do not propose a stand-alone goal but rather suggest that human rights be integrated throughout the post-2015 framework, with "a human rights approach underpinning each 'sectoral' goal"16.

A concrete example of how to align and underpin socio-economic goals with existing economic, social and cultural rights standards comes from the water and sanitation sector, strengthened by the recent recognition by the UN GA of the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation. Going beyond the narrow focus on improved infrastructure, which was monitored by MDG 7.C, UN Water's proposals for a goal on water, among other things, aim for universal access, target those most excluded, especially those excluded by discrimination, invest in collection of disaggregated data, promote equality, and monitor quality and reliability of water and sanitation services. This builds on criteria drawn explicitly from the human rights standards on safe drinking water and sanitation.17 In relation to science, technology and innovation for sustainable development, proposals for the Post 2015 Development Agenda have emphasized alignment with rights of all people "to enjoy the benefits of scientific progress and its applications" and to "seek, receive and impart information".

With regard to equality and non-discrimination, all thematic consultations have drawn attention to the fact that the MDGs' focus on less ambitious "half-way" targets and on average progress has meant that the poorest families, and most deprived and marginalized groups, including minorities, migrants and indigenous peoples, have been left behind, even if the goals may be met in the aggregate at the national or global level. As a result, a strong call for "zero targets" is emerging, i.e.

15 UNDG (2013),  A Million Voices , p.2. 16 Ibid, p. 42. See also HLP Report (Annex II); and UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Open Letter,

Human Rights in the Post-2015 Agenda, 6 June 2012, for expressing targets as "reduce to zero" or "100 percent"18, and for disaggregating data in order to identify and redress disparities. Many proposals have also focused on the realization of women's rights and achievement of gender equality as centre-pieces of the post 2015 agenda grounded in human rights commitments and principles.

Most proposals are reasonably balanced in terms of their treatment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, with civil and political rights often included within "good governance" or rule of law proposals19. The report of the Secretary-General's High Level Panel on "A New Global Partnership", for example, proposes a goal (Goal 10) on good governance and effective institutions, which includes references to a range of civil and political rights, including freedom of speech and association, the right to information and public participation in political processes at all levels. It also proposes a goal (Goal 11) to ensure stable and peaceful societies which addresses issues of freedom from violence, the administration of justice and the accountability of security forces, police and judiciary. This reiterates the commitments of the Rio+20 Outcome Document which emphasised the importance of democratic governance, based upon the rule of law and of effective and accountable institutions, including independent and accessible justice systems, as necessary requirements for sustainable development.20

The SDSN report was among the few that gave explicit consideration to the right to development. However, it did so without reference to the 1986 UN Declaration on the Right to Development, instead using the term (imprecisely) as shorthand for economic growth and convergence in living standards. The 1986 Declaration makes it clear that development is not only about economic growth but rather about the rights of all persons to participate in economic, social, cultural and political development focussed on the constant improvement of human well-being. In order for the post-2015 development agenda to be grounded securely within the right to development as the international community has defined it, the new agenda must direct development efforts to the realization of human rights, including through strengthened rule of law, greater human rights accountability, the active, free and meaningful participation of all people (including women, young people, migrants, older persons, minorities and persons with disabilities), and enhanced international cooperation. Where indigenous populations are concerned, participation should be governed by the principle of free, prior, informed consent.21

Many proposals seek to strengthen accountability in various ways, for example by highlighting the importance of "continued participation - not just in [the] process to determine the world's priorities, but also to hold governments, business, international organizations and civil society to account for achieving them."22 Specific suggestions for the design of post-2015 goals and accountability arrangements include the recommendation of objective criteria for the identification of post-2015 priorities23. It will also be critical to improve capacity for data collection and analysis at all levels24. It has been recommended that the new agenda draw on the comprehensive and flexible set of targets and indicators that the human rights framework offers. In terms of monitoring mechanisms, many

18 Global Agenda Council on Benchmarking Progress, World Economic Forum, Brookings Institute (2012)

"Getting to Zero - Finishing the Job the MDGs Started"; and the UNDG reports on the global thematic consultations on Health, Education, and Addressing Inequalities (2013).

19 HLP Report; Open Working Group co-Chairs' interim report 2013; SG report to the GA, 2013. 20 Rio+20 Outcome Document, para 10.

21 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, A/RES/61/295, paras 10, 11, 19, 28, 29; ILO Convention

169. 22 UNDG (2013); "A Million Voices", p. 2. 23 UNDG Governance Consultation; OHCHR and Center for Economic and Social Rights, Who Will Be have argued for a stronger role for international human rights monitoring mechanisms like the Universal Periodic Review of the UN Human Rights Council, the human rights treaty monitoring bodies and the ILO supervisory machinery. Others have highlighted sectoral monitoring mechanisms, such as the WHO Commission on Information and Accountability for Women's and Children's Health, environmental accountability mechanisms, as well as peer review mechanisms, citizen score cards and other social accountability mechanisms through which individuals can engage with service providers25. While the private sector is mentioned in many proposals for its important contributions to innovation, technology and growth, the accountability of the private sector is often neglected. The UN Global Compact report however, argues that "it is essential for companies to conduct due diligence to identify and address any adverse impacts their operations may have on human rights." The August 2013 Asia-Pacific Ministerial Dialogue "From the MDGs to UN Development Agenda Beyond 2015" also supports this. The UNDG Governance Consultation recommended that the 2011 UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights should be the foundation stone for the accountability of the private sector in connection with the post-2015 agenda.

III. The way forward

The consultations, technical processes and initial discussions among member States have clearly illustrated the strong demand for integrating human rights in the post-2015 agenda. The question is: how should human rights most effectively be integrated within the Post-2015 Agenda? One of the key messages from the post-2015 consultations and proposals to date is that development issues are human rights issues, and human rights can help address development challenges. Human rights can help us to identify our priorities and set the standards with which to align goals, targets and indicators and monitoring mechanisms.

Given intimate inter-linkages between human rights and development, a self-standing "human rights" goal would not seem to be called for. In fact, it is seen by many as counter-productive. Rather, human rights can frame and reinforce a post-2015 vision, goals, targets, indicators, means of implementation, and accountability arrangements, in the following ways:

x Vision: People are asking for a transformative post-2015 human rights vision.26 Under a human rights vision, poverty eradication is a matter of justice and obligation, and not only a policy option. A human rights vision is holistic and universal, based on the dignity and equal worth of all human beings, without discrimination, protected through strong and independent rule of law institutions. It addresses freedom from fear as well as freedom from want, in all countries, prioritising those who are most marginalised. In this vision, human rights are the ultimate ends of development, as the HLP report exemplifies.

x Goals: Member States at Rio+20 agreed that SDGs should, among other things, be consistent with international law and supportive of international human rights standards, which suggests that goals should explicitly refer to the corresponding human rights standards (including the core UN human rights treaties and international labour standards) where applicable, not merely in a rhetorical manner but in a way that imports and reinforces the actual content of those rights as recognised in international law. Aligning goals and targets with existing human rights standards means ensuring that civil and political rights are included, along with economic, social and cultural rights, in a balanced and manageable agenda. Goals should aim for universal access or coverage, and should be applicable to all people everywhere, as many post-2015 proposals have argued. And, while a self-standing "human rights" goal would not be warranted, there are a

25 OHCHR and Center for Economic and Social Rights, Who Will Be Accountable? Human Rights and the Post- number of strong proposals for adding new self-standing goals that go beyond socio-economic goals, including to eliminate discrimination and achieve equality, and to ensure good governance and rule of law (including democratic participation, personal security, and access to justice).

x Targets: As with goals, targets should be closely and explicitly aligned with their corresponding human rights standards. While goals should be aspirational, targets should be ambitious but achievable. Wherever practicable, targets should be expressed as "reduce to zero" or "100 per cent", within identified target dates. While human rights treaties recognise that social rights are to be realised progressively, to the maximum extent of available resources, with progress benchmarked over time, shorter timeframes are required for the realisation of rights that are less resource-dependent, and to fulfil immediate obligations such as the elimination of discrimination. At the same time, tailoring or adapting global targets (including target dates) to the national and sub-national levels will also be essential. The MDGs were sometimes unfairly used as a one-size-fits-all metric of progress, comparing progress in countries with very different circumstances and starting points. Human rights criteria can help to overcome this problem. Firstly, participatory processes should be employed to set ambitious, equitable and achievable national and subnational targets and to subsequently monitor those on a partnership basis, including civil society, employers' and workers' organisations, local government and others. Secondly, human rights and environmental treaty standards that are binding for their parties, and recommendations from those treaties' monitoring mechanisms and ILO supervisory bodies, can guide national tailoring of global goals and targets to individual countries' needs, capacities and existing obligations. The UN Task Team report on Statistics and Indicators discusses these criteria.27

x Indicators and measuring progress: The MDGs focus on a small number of (mainly) outcome indicators. By contrast, a human rights perspective calls for evidence of commitment and fiscal and policy effort, as well as improved outcomes.28 This necessitates a certain number of key input and output indicators, in addition to outcome indicators, where international treaties and the evidence so require. Post-2015 consultations have confirmed that many dimensions of human rights-based development (including civil and political rights) are adequately measurable for the purposes of a global development agenda. Human rights standards also emphasise availability, accessibility, affordability, acceptability and quality of social services. Many post-2015 proposals have successfully integrated these criteria within the design of goals, targets and indicators, but much more is still possible. Other implications of human rights for monitoring include: data disaggregation to capture inequalities, exclusion and discrimination against women, children, adolescents and youth, older persons, minorities, migrants, indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities and others; identifying and addressing disparities relating to location (e.g. rural-urban/remote areas/slum locations) and income/wealth; broadening data sources including "big data" as the HLP report and UN Task Team report on Statistics and Indicators recommend, and building national and regional capacities to collect, analyse and use population data for development, including through international partnerships29; and establishing participatory monitoring processes at all levels, including mechanisms for people-led information generation on progress and performance against targets, indicators and standards.

27 UN Task Team working group on monitoring and indicators, "Statistics and indicators for the Post-2015 Development Agenda" (July 2013), para 53(b).

28 OHCHR, Human Rights Indicators: A Guide for Measurement and Implementation (2012), at http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/Human_rights_indicators_en.pdf; World Bank Study, Human x Means of implementation: Human rights and environmental treaties contain agreed principles for international cooperation and fair burden-sharing30. The Rio+20 outcome document called for policy coherence at the global level. Integrating human rights within social and environmental impact assessment processes can strengthen policy coherence.31 Commitments to this effect, and related global partnership commitments and institutional reform measures, could be reflected as process (or output) indicators which could be consolidated within in a new self-standing "global partnership" goal with specific, time-bound targets, and integrated as needed across other goal areas.

x Accountability: MDGs accountability mechanisms are relatively weak. Post-2015 consultation processes yielded calls for mechanisms to ensure reporting, redress and accountability. Political, administrative, judicial, quasi-judicial and social accountability mechanisms are important, at global, regional, national and local levels, to ensure that relevant institutions have clear responsibilities, are answerable for them, and are subject to enforceability when delivery fails.32 Those mechanisms should draw from and build on existing human rights mechanisms as well as experiences with participatory methodologies at national and local levels for budget transparency and the monitoring of development programmes. The UN Global Compact report noted the importance of business undertaking human rights due diligence, within the framework of their contributions to the post-2015 agenda. The 2011 UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights can guide the regulation of business responsibilities in this context, built on a baseline duty of human rights due diligence, as part of a new self-standing "global partnership" goal.

30 UNEP, Compilation of internationally agreed environmental goals and objectives, November 2012, available

at http://geg.informea.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/GEG-Booklet-Jan-2013.pdf; See also, World Bank, Human Rights Impact Assessments: A Review of the Literature, Differences with other forms of Assessment and Relevance for Development (2013).

31 UNDG, Review of Outcomes: Final Meeting of the Global Thematic Consultation on Governance in the Post-

2015 Framework (March 2013), p.2, at http://www.worldwewant2015.org/2015report. 32 UNDG, Review of Outcomes: Final Meeting of the Global Thematic Consultation on Governance in the Post-

2015 Framework (March 2013), at http://www.worldwewant2015.org/2015report; OHCHR and Center for Economic and Social Rights, Who Will Be Accountable? Human Rights and the Post-2015 Development Agenda (United Nations: Geneva, 2013) at 31-58; UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Open Letter on Human Rights and the Post-2015 Agenda, 6 June 2013.

Issues Brief 19: GLOBAL GOVERNANCE

1

International arrangements for collective decision making have not kept pace with the magnitude and depth of global change. The increasing interdependence of the global economy and integrated decision making call for better mechanisms of global governance for tackling sustainable development challenges. The promotion of balanced and inclusive economic growth, social development and environment protection requires strengthened collective action including through international cooperation and a strengthened institutional framework, with a central role for the United Nations system in an inclusive, transparent and effective multilateral system.2

I. Stocktaking

a)

The role of the UN and its entities in global governance for sustainable development

Global governance for sustainable development is mainly based on formal arrangements and treaty-based institutions with defined memberships, mandates and institutional machinery. Three issues which commonly arise in governance discussions are:

x Effectiveness: current arrangements have been unable to satisfactorily address development challenges, such as to free humanity from poverty and hunger, to reduce global economic imbalances and inequalities, to foster inclusive economic growth for human and social progress, to advance international cooperation for development, to reverse environmental degradation or to operationalize an effective framework for climate change mitigation and adaptation. Progress has been uneven and the reasons many and varied.

x Representativeness: developing countries remain under-represented in several key decision-making bodies. Current arrangements fall short in representing evolving world realities and accommodating changing power relations. Related to this, ways to enhance transparency, accountability and the meaningful participation of all stakeholders, including business and civil society, need greater attention.

x Coherence: existing governance arrangements have been largely unable to bridge the gap between globally agreed goals and aspirations, and policies at the national level. The lack of coherence and some degree of duplication is widely evident in the diverse global approaches to sustainable development.

The formal system of international governance in the economic, social, environmental and related fields has been based on two basic principles: specialization of and coordination among specialized international organizations. Most of these institutions were created in a different context in response to specific challenges. In an era of interrelated sustainable development challenges the current structures present a challenge for integrated responses.

Specialized agencies are autonomous entities with their own governance structures. They have specific mandates in their area of expertise and take decisions according to their own decision-making processes and rules. These institutions are accountable to their membership, which could differ from one to another.

In some cases, the respective weight of their members in their related area put the representativeness of International Organizations (IOs) into question. As an example, the Bretton

Woods Institutions, which play a crucial role for maintaining global macroeconomic stability, and providing resources, guidance and assistance to their membership, face this limitation. In these institutions, calls have been made to improve the voting systems to adequately reflect shifts in economic power, and ongoing reforms aim to strengthen the voice and representation of emerging economies and developing countries through quota shares reallocation.

In other cases and various areas, International Organisations (IOs), whose decision making processes are based on the consensus rule or the "one-state-one-vote" principle, demonstrate broad inclusiveness. However, building consensus among member states can sometime prove complex and difficult, thereby affecting the effectiveness of these institutions to take action. Implementing decisions can also prove challenging. International arrangements face compliance gaps at the national level and difficulties in ratification of signed conventions.

Coordination, the second basic principle, has been the responsibility of the United Nations. The overall coordination of UN system activities in economic, social and related areas was explicitly delegated to the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), as one of the six principal Organs.3

However, the decentralized structure of the system, with the specialized agencies, funds, programmes and subsidiary bodies of ECOSOC has made internal coordination and cooperation difficult. ECOSOC has been recently reformed through GA resolution 68/1 and clearly assigned the function of promoting coordination, cooperation and coherence among the various parts of the system, and to promote a balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development4 in the context of the follow-up to United Nations conferences and summits. The Council is also mandated to continue to strengthen and further promote dialogue on and implementation of the financing for development agenda, inter alia, by strengthening existing arrangements, including the special high-level meeting with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

Along the same lines, the Rio+20 Outcome Document recommends strengthening the institutional framework that "should find common solutions related to global challenges to sustainable development" (Para 75) , and "enhance coherence, reduce fragmentation and overlap and increase effectiveness, efficiency and transparency, while reinforcing coordination and cooperation" (Para 76). To this end, the universality of the UN is critical (Para 77) and the key role of the ECOSOC to ensure the UN system-wide coherence, enhance the overall coordination and achieve a balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development, is paramount (Para 82). The strengthening of international environmental governance through the upgrading of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) as the leading global environmental authority (Para 88) is part of the new institutional framework for sustainable development.

Furthermore, the setting up of the new universal, intergovernmental, High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) (Para 84) can help improve cooperation and coordination under the auspices of the GA and ECOSOC. The UN-GA recently decided that HLPF "consistent with its universal character, shall provide political leadership, guidance and recommendations for sustainable development, follow up and review progress in the implementation of sustainable development commitments, enhance the integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development in a holistic and cross-sectoral manner at all levels".5

3

At the inter-agency level, the main mechanisms for promoting coordination, coherence and information-sharing have led to some improvements. The UN System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB), and its High-level Committee on Programmes and the High Level Committee on Management (HLCP/HLCM), and the UN Development Group (UNDG), which is responsible for coordinating operational activities at the country level, have developed effective and coordinated approaches to system-wide concerns. CEB members aim to further enhance cooperation on sustainable development, develop strategic priorities that can be pursued collectively, and strengthen linkages between its normative and operational work. However, the the functioning and governance of IOs are not always naturally conducive to policy integration across institutional lines, which must be overcome to strengthen inter-agency collaboration and help bring into deliberations of their governing bodies the consideration of issues beyond their respective specific mandate.

Likewise, the current funding architecture and future funding trends incentivize UN entities to advocate the relevance of their specific agendas and mandates in order to strengthen their fundraising prospects, even sometimes at the expense of a broader and more efficient inter-agency collaboration. Pooling arrangements such as multi-partner trust funds to finance joint initiatives have proven results in terms of efficiency, effectiveness and integration and can be a way forward. However, even in this case the required flexibility can be hindered by increasingly earmarked funding.

b) Emerging state driven governance arrangements

In spite of commitments made in the outcomes of numerous conferences and processes for enhancing the UN's coordination role in the global governance architecture6, the reality is that many other arrangements and groupings now exist where some countries enjoy greater weight or voice than others.

Partly as a result of the shortcomings of treaty-based institutions of the global governance architecture, a number of informal groupings aiming at addressing issues of global impact have emerged. Indeed, governments of countries sharing certain characteristics or common interests have chosen to form informal arrangements for their cooperation and build ad hoc cooperation groupings. The underlying logic of these narrower and nimble groupings is that they are likely to be more capable of taking swifter collective action than the fully-fledged machinery of broader and more inclusive international bodies.

For example the G20, which brings together a number of large advanced and emerging economies, gained much greater prominence in the wake of the financial and economic crisis of 2008. The G20 aims to address global challenges and takes actions that fall in the three domains of sustainable development. However, it still needs to showcase its ability to tackle global challenges and raises legitimacy and accountability concerns in some quarters.

States have also set up new treaty-based arrangements in critical areas of global sustainable development. The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI), and the future BRICS Bank are examples of emerging cross-cutting areas where treaty-based institutions are seen as a way for their founders to supplement, or fill gaps in, the existing set of institutions. For others, these institutions may raise concerns about further fragmentation of the system. Regional institutions and arrangements represent another key component of global governance for sustainable development as they are well placed to capture and respond to specific regional needs and demands especially for small countries, which are often most affected by global rules but with little say in their design.

A willingness to innovate institutionally is part of the discussion on global governance. For instance, in the health sector there have been a number of innovations that include but go beyond member states: the Global Fund (resource mobilization, country ownership, and a governance structure that includes the private sector and civil society), GAVI (innovation in financing and research, and addressing inequity in access to life-saving commodities), and UNAIDS (political and technical coherence). The creation of UN-Women aimed to consolidate and lend critical mass to efforts in the area of gender equality and the empowerment of women.

c) Evolution of inter-action with non-state actors and stakeholders

While states remain at the centre of global governance arrangements, non-state actors have assumed increased importance, especially with respect to sustainable development. Agenda 21 highlighted the role of nine major groups, including women, indigenous peoples, local authorities and business and industry. Non-state actors are playing an increasing role in global cooperation, and the UN has increasingly engaged with partners from the private sector, civil society, academic bodies, global networks, and think tanks, in a wide array of platforms and joint initiatives for policy analysis, action and evaluation. For example, in a series of global, regional and national consultations in about 100 countries and through a social media platform, more than a million people shared their views on "the world we want". With the private sector, the UN Global Compact is a strategic policy initiative for businesses that are committed to aligning their operations and strategies with ten universally accepted principles in the areas of human rights, labour, environment and anticorruption. Likewise, the Committee on World Food Security (CFS), a multi-stakeholder forum for global food and nutrition policy, where civil society organizations, private sector associations and research institutions participate alongside Member States and relevant UN entities, might be considered a case in point of an inclusive new global governance arrangement. All these processes aim to promote global partnerships and make global governance more participatory.

II. Overview of proposals

Over the years, different groups of experts have addressed the issue of strengthening global governance. Many proposals have suggested creating new institutions, which usually involve the development of consensus or integrated solutions on a whole gamut of policies from social to economic and environmental ones7 - in short, on sustainable development.8 They also aim at "securing consistency between the policy goals of major international institutions"9, including financial and trade institutions, in some cases through the development of a policy coordination framework.10. Certain proposals have focused more specifically on creating an Economic Security

7 1992 Human Development Report; High-level Panel on System-wide Coherence, Deliver as One, 2006;

Commission on Global Governance, 1995; High-level Panel, Commission on Global Governance, 1992; 1975 report of the Group of Experts on the Structure of the United Nations System: "A new United Nations Structure for Global Economic Cooperation" (also known as the Gardner Report); The Independent Working Group on

Council tasked with the coordination and oversight of economic and financial policies in the aftermath of the economic and financial crisis.11

However, in the absence of mechanisms to bring about compliance with agreed norms and goals, new institutions alone do not guarantee effective governance. The UN system can help address this challenge in strengthening global governance arrangements through constructive inputs for deliberation by member states, and also in the way the UN governing bodies function to improve coherent policy making.

Proposals and areas of reform include the following:

x As envisioned by the UN Secretary General for its inaugural meeting, a strong HLPF "will take the international community in new directions, guide the UN system and hold it accountable".12 It is expected to promote policy coherence within the UN system, integrate future sustainable development goals in UN-system wide policies and programming, and provide an opportunity for constructive peer review of progress amongst member states.

x Implementation of reforms to re-invigorate ECOSOC's coordination function so that the Council can be a constructive partner in the policy dialogue with member states.

x The report of the UK Prime Minister13 to the G20 proposes enhancing overall coherence among all the institutions grappling with the challenges of interdependence, and improving cooperation among established institutions and processes tackling challenges in critical cross-cutting areas.

x The Secretary-General's reports on global economic governance and development14 have recommended, among other proposals, enhancing the functioning and working methods of relevant United Nations organs (especially ECOSOC) and their subsidiary machinery, as well as enhancing their coordination and coherence. In addition to efforts to further enhance the voice and representation of developing countries in multilateral institutions and other norm-and standard setting bodies, the Secretary-General suggests that the UN and the G20 should continue interacting "to ensure complementarity between their objectives and activities in support of development".

III. The way forward

Dramatic changes in the world over the last few decades have included progress in eradicating extreme poverty, shifts in economic power, and deeper understanding of the interdependency between poverty eradication and sustainable development, and of the need for transformational economic change. Global governance institutions need to be able to manage the interlinkages among the three dimensions of sustainable development in such as a way as to secure shared and sustainable prosperity. This integrated approach, moreover, needs to be adopted across regions, among institutions and stakeholders, and among interrelated sectors such as land, agriculture, water and energy. Sound policies at different levels of governance, and in both the public and private sectors, need to be informed by a strengthened science-policy interface. The realization of sustainable development in a way that is consistent with the UN definition of the right to

11 Commission of Experts of the General Assembly president on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System, September 21, 2009.

12 Secretary-General's remarks at inaugural meeting of the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable development requires international institutions anchoring on fundamental principles such as participation, transparency, democracy, accountability and rule of law. The post-2015 agenda could define a target for the attainment of an inclusive and equitable system of global governance and governance of the global commons; this would be a way of incorporating a renewed global partnership into the new agenda. The sub-components of this target may comprise, for example, enhancing participation of developing countries in multilateral institutions, increasing the latter's representativeness and accountability, and the establishment of a UN-led monitoring and accountability mechanism with a focus on equitable and inclusive growth, environmental sustainability, human rights, equality, and peace and security. The active participation of relevant non-state actors, including civil society and the private sector, in dialogue and activities pertaining to sustainable development is also critical. The key is ensuring that there are mechanisms to facilitate accountable, inclusive and transparent institutions in a new development framework.

The development of multi-level governance in coordination with regional commissions and organizations can help provide better representation in global fora for smaller and least developed countries and stronger voice and ownership for them. Linkages between the regional and the global levels could be enhanced such that regional and global processes could inform and strengthen one another. Within the UN, it has been argued that this could take place through a strengthened Economic and Social Council, and the coordination, catalytic and convening roles of the regional commissions, which could help articulate regional perspectives on the thematic focus of the Council's annual ministerial reviews. Regional commissions could also in future become hubs of regional high-level political fora on sustainable development and of the national voluntary reporting and reviews of progress with the SDGs and the post-2015 development agenda.

Interaction between the UN and the G20 should be strengthened as proposed by the Global Governance Group.16 The G20 agenda already draws on a range of UN agencies that offer inputs and additional perspective on the world economy and prospects, taxation, climate finance, jobs, development, food security, social protection, inclusive green growth and long-term investment financing. The post-2015 process in itself has helped to drive a more integrated UN operational system, including through the global consultations facilitated by the UNDG, and support on implementation that will begin in 2016. The establishment of the High Level Political Forum will also provide incentives to improve policy coherence within the UN system, and overhaul interagency mechanisms to coordinate and integrate better the three dimensions of sustainable development in UN-system wide policies and programming.

Issues Brief 20: SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

1

I. Stocktaking

Key trends Humanity is now half urban and expected to be nearly 70 per cent urban by 20502. For the SDGs to be globally relevant they must be relevant to city-dwellers. Indeed, Member States' responses to the questionnaire on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) show that cities are one of their top priorities3. 60 per cent of the area expected to be urban by 2030 remains to be built, indicating that the shape of future cities must be guided proactively.4 If current trends hold, cities in the developing world with at least 100,000 people will expand up to three times their present size. Policymakers need to adopt a wider view of cities' use of space and resource footprints and to connect local development with global impact to achieve long-term urban sustainability5.

The majority of population growth in cities is the result of natural increase, rural-urban migration and the reclassification of formerly non-urban areas. It is also predominantly taking place in cities in developing countries, most notably in Africa and Asia6. These growth trends are most pronounced in small to intermediate-sized cities, where infrastructural backlogs are often highest and technical and financial capacity the lowest.7 Rapidly growing cities will have to be even more innovative than those in the past in terms of how they take advantage of the efficiencies and innovation from agglomeration within an increasingly resource-confined environment. Slowly growing cities in the developed world also have their part to play in reducing per capita resource use and emissions, in many cases by retrofitting existing, obsolete infrastructure and promoting more sustainable patterns of consumption and production.

Rather than achieving greater efficiency, most cities are forfeiting much of their potential agglomeration advantages related to concentration and connectivity and are instead losing density. From 1990-2000, cities around the world grew spatially faster than their populations; those in the developing world grew 20% faster8. As cities lose density and sprawl they lock themselves into unsustainable land use patterns where jobs and people are far from one another, transportation costs and congestion are high, infrastructure runs are longer and more costly, segregation of socioeconomic groups and land use types are more pronounced and environmental impacts are greater. During the next two decades the world will more than double the amount of land used for cities. It is important to build this new urban fabric sustainably because once it is built change is slow and difficult.

Social and environmental implications These conditions are being experienced in increasingly unequal ways, especially among women, female-headed households, youth, children, and other marginalized groups such as the poor, people living with HIV/AIDS, stigmatized ethnic groups, the elderly and people with disabilities. Lack of

1 The Technical Support Team is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the United

Nations Development Programme. This issues brief was co-led by UN-Habitat and UNEP with the participation of ECLAC, ESCAP, IFAD, ILO, UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNISDR, UN-Women, WHO, WMO, and the World Bank. 2 UN/POP/EGM-URB/2008/01. An overview of urbanization, internal migration, population distribution and

development 3 A/67 Secretary-General's Initial Input to the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals 4secure tenure disproportionately affects the poor, particularly poor children. Exposure to pollutants and living in areas contaminated by industrial waste or close to heavy traffic are highly correlated to mortality and developmental delays for children. High degrees of transience, crowding, insecurity and poor conditions in many urban settings can mean high levels of stress, undermining social capital, and ultimately resulting in lower levels of reciprocity, higher rates of crime and violence and lower life expectancy. The destruction of cultural resources, including built heritage and creative industries, also degrades urban living.

In cities, wealth and poverty are increasingly segregated. Inequalities occur in many areas but are frequently consolidated in the spatial trap of slums. This is particularly the case in the developing world. There are now roughly one billion slum dwellers, including one third of the population of the developing world, who contend with economic, social and physical exclusion. Slum dwellers experience one or more poor housing conditions (e.g. lack of durable housing and secure tenure, insufficient living spaces) and/or lack of access to basic services (e.g. adequate clean water, sanitation, personal security). Lack of access to health, adequate food, education and employment opportunities, decent transport, access to credit and the rule of law often further entrenches them in poverty. As a result, slum dwellers may not be able to attain full citizenship. Women and youth are generally even worse off.

Between 2002 and 2007, 60 per cent of urban residents in developing countries also reported being victims of a crime. Women, children and youth -- especially girls -- face particular risks in this context, including increased vulnerability and exposure to discrimination, harassment and violence in public and private space9. Other stigmatized groups (e.g. indigenous people, migrants, LGBT people, people living with disabilities or HIV/Aids, sex workers, etc.) also bear the brunt of these risks, especially because of limited access to information, services and justice.

Unplanned urbanization not only affects people, but also vulnerable agricultural land and ecosystems on which human wellbeing also depends. Despite the positive efficiencies of compactness, cities remain large-scale consumers of water, energy, and natural and processed products as well as significant generators of greenhouse gas emissions and waste. For many in the developed world and the rich all over the world, per capita resource use and emissions remain high. But beyond overconsumption and inefficiency, the materials flows in many cities are linear rather than circular. By any measure waste production is outpacing the earth's carrying and regenerative capacity. This is particularly problematic as the world has entered an era of resource scarcity that requires us to do more with less. In general, fossil fuel prices have risen steadily since the late 1990s. The future sustainability of cities in terms of energy supply, their role in meeting global emission reduction targets and their ability to participate in the carbon economy are by no means automatic.10

Other vulnerabilities relate to the form of urban development in which peripheral dispersion, proliferating transport lines and piecemeal speculative development are primarily responsible for the fragmentation, degradation and destruction of natural habitat. In addition to the impact on communities and non-human species, they also undermine the ecosystem services that support much 'hard' urban infrastructure. This type of development also exacerbates urban vulnerability to climate change impacts, including weather and geological hazards. Cities are some of the most vulnerable areas to natural disasters: well over half of coastal areas are urbanized11 and 21 of the world's 33 megacities lie in coastal flood zones. The risks in cities differ due to density, weak local governance structures and the location of urban slums, thus requiring different solutions for improved sanitation, disaster preparedness and increased food and nutrition security. Regrettably, despite a rapidly changing climate, many urban areas are designed on the basis of past weather-related information and without regard for disaster impact. As a result, coastal cities may face unforeseen challenges such as sea-level rise leading to the displacement of unprotected populations. Worst yet, poor urban populations must often resort to unsustainable coping strategies and mechanisms.

Opportunities and approaches Yet with 60% of their area still to be built before 2030, cities represent unparalleled opportunity. The report of the Secretary-General's High Level Panel on the post-2015 development agenda states that 'cities are where the battle for sustainable development will be won or lost.' It also highlights that 'cities are the world's engines for business and innovation. With good management they can provide jobs, hope and growth, while building sustainability.' The urban future has great potential for humanity in terms of greater equitability, economic growth, strengthened social cohesion, improved environmental outcomes and human development. Urbanization is also linked to poverty reduction.13 MDG Target 7(d) has shown the benefit of focusing on slums, but additional slum dwellers indicate the need to more systemically address the sheer scale and pace of urbanization.14 Infrastructure choices made today will have critical implications for the future sustainability of cities across the world. If disaster impact assessments inform infrastructure investments, cities will benefit from long-term resilience to hazards.

The Rio+20 outcome document emphasized the need for holistic urban development approaches for delivering sustainability.15 Because global urban land cover is growing more quickly than urban population, better integrated urban and territorial planning and governance will have to focus on aspects of space and configuration that are unaddressed in other SDG proposals. A focus on improved governance and more integrated sectors are insufficient on their own. Other approaches to urban sustainability - e.g. resource efficiency and management, material flows analysis, the ecosystem approach, climate diagnostics and planning, energy inventories and risk management - would complement this spatial framework, including those discussed in other issues briefs, e.g., sustainable transport, energy, climate change and disaster risk reduction, sustainable consumption and production, sustained and inclusive economic growth and infrastructure development and industrialization.

Integrated planning and design are transformative and must continue to set the stage for sustainable cities. Indeed without them infrastructural and behavioural lock-in frequently occur, making attempts at later reconfiguration difficult and expensive. In contrast, well-planned, compact cities that offer a mix of land uses, building typologies, transport and jobs generally also offer higher levels of well-being at lower rates of resource use and emissions; the very core of the principles of a green economy endorsed at Rio+20.16 Decoupling of this nature can be achieved by resource efficient cities that would better manage material flows and resource use, despite the increase in

12 UN-Habitat (2007): State of the World's Cities: The Millennium Development Goals and Urban Sustainability,

UN-Habitat, Nairobi 13demand for products and services. High density, mixed use urban living with accessible jobs can actually shrink ecological footprints by reducing energy and material consumption per capita. Well-planned, intelligently designed cities that integrate sustainable use of surrounding and far-flung ecosystems and resources therefore have the potential to improve the lives of half the planet's people today, and 80% by 2030. Place-based, gender-responsive urban design can also create safe public spaces and non-motorized transit systems, promoting both social cohesion and safety in areas with the world's most concentrated diversity. Reducing violence and fear of violence can greatly increase freedom of movement, particularly for women and girls.

Harnessing the positive potential of urbanization can maximize human development and wellbeing, while minimizing environmental impact. This requires intervention at multiple scales, i.e. national, regional and local, with the city-region as geographical key to implementing solutions beyond administrative boundaries. It also requires strengthened partnerships with national governments, civil society, community-based organisations, international organizations, academia and private sector entities in the urban sphere. It also calls for a territorial development approach that fosters two-way links across the urban-rural continuum and creates economic opportunities and enhanced quality of life in rural areas. Cities' efficient delivery and use of facilities and amenities can also help promote secure ecosystem services and rural prosperity through improved mobility and access.18 Well-developed and managed rural-urban infrastructural, economic, and social linkages are also critical to enable rural areas to provide vital goods (including food) and services to urban centres. Localized food systems including in mid-size towns can promote these links through trade, local procurement and rural employment.

Sustainable urban development requires transformative policies at multiple levels of governance. It also demands a multi-sectoral, multi-stakeholder approach that engages the private sector, civil society, foundations, local authorities and higher levels of government as well as regional and global networks of cities. With the benefit of decentralization, city governments are playing an increased role in ensuring wellbeing for their citizens. Indeed, local government is the closest to citizens and best placed to promote cultural diversity and safeguard living heritage. Many cities are adopting comprehensive urban policies for livelihood opportunities, innovative energy development, creative economy growth and responsive service delivery and reflecting cultural values in their planning processes. Efforts to enhance capacities, strengthen legal authority and improve fiscal bases are also essential. Inclusive, accountable local governance maximizes urban benefits.

Cities are the engines of growth and centres of innovation, and as such they are poised to be the driving force of global sustainable development. But for them to contribute meaningfully to the eradication of poverty they will also have to provide better access to decent employment opportunities and adequate social protection systems. Safety nets are fundamental to promoting social inclusivity. Urban development policies must therefore favour people-centred enterprise development. As dense nexuses of civil society, academia and the private sector, cities are well placed to ensure alignment between educational supply and labour market demand.

II. Overview of proposals

Current proposals for reflecting sustainable cities in the SDGs fall along three complementary lines, beginning with securing a dedicated goal on sustainable cities. An SDG on sustainable cities could be transformative and integrated, which have been proposed in a report of the Secretary-General as criteria for all goals. The Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) details how an urban SDG could transform challenges into opportunities, mobilize and empower urban actors, integrate planning with economic development and converge design with service delivery.19 Such a goal could be productively complemented by the inclusion of urban targets in other goals. These could be further supported by urban/rural disaggregated indicators throughout the SDGs.

Dedicated goal on sustainable cities UN-Habitat (December 2012) has proposed the goal of 'promot[ing] cities that are environmentally sustainable, socially inclusive, economically productive and resilient', with the following targets set for 2030: (1) national urban policies for territorial cohesion and urban-rural linkages; (2) decelerated urban sprawl; (3) prevalence of urban design and public space; (4) reduced proportion of people living in slums; (5) urban residents voting in local elections and using participatory approaches; (6) reduced rate of urban violent crime; (7) cities with policies on urban job creation, particularly for youth and women; (8) reduced time and expenditure on travel, access to public and non-motorized transport and reduced traffic-related deaths; (9) renewable energy and recycled waste and improved energy efficiency in buildings; (10) universal access to drinking water and reduced untreated waste and waste water; and (11) policies and plans for strengthened resilience.20 See http://www.unhabitat.org/downloads/docs/11858_1_594728.pdf

Global Task Force of Local and Regional Governments for Post-2015 and Habitat III, (March 2013) suggested that '[t]he new development agendaacknowledge local and regional governments as a specific sphere of government and as key actors of developmentaddressing global and local challenges' and recommended eight objectives: (1) good local and regional governance; (2) food security and nutrition; (3) universal basic service provision; (4) local economic development, job creation and sustainable consumption and production; (5) urban planning and design, territorial cohesion and climate change resilience; (6) culture as an enabler of development; (7) protection and management of biodiversity and natural resources; and (8) decentralized cooperation between local governments. See http://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/ENG_Press_Release_UCLG_Global_TFnew%20%281%29.pdf

Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN, June 2013) has recommended a goal of '[e]mpower[ing] inclusive, productive and resilient cities', addressing their social, economic and environmental dimensions. Such a goal would include three targets: (1) eliminate extreme urban poverty, expand employment and productivity, and raise living standards, especially in slums and informal settlements; (2) ensure universal access to a secure and affordable built environment and basic urban services: housing, water, sanitation and waste management; low-carbon energy and transportation; and communication; and (3) ensure safe air quality and water quality for all, and integrate reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, efficient land and resource use, and climate and disaster resilience into investments and standards. See http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/ 06/130613-SDSN-An-Action-Agenda-for-Sustainable-Development-FINAL.pdf

Mayors Adaptation Forum Bonn Declaration of Mayors (June 2013) 'urge[s] nations to adopt a universal Sustainable Development Goal for cities and announce[s its] readiness to collaborate with all local government networks and global partners to ensure its implementation as part of the post-2015 development agenda. Accordingly, it 'invite[s] local governments to develop and implement a holistic ecosystems-based approach for developing city-region food systems that ensure food security, contribute to urban poverty eradication, protect and enhance local level biodiversity andstrengthen urban resilience and adaptation.' See http://resilient-cities.iclei.org/fileadmin/ sites/resilient-cities/files/Resilient_Cities_2013/MAF_2013_Bonn_Declaration_of_Mayors.pdf

Supplementary targets on sustainable cities World Health Organization (May 2012) has highlighted the health co-benefits of improved housing, land use patterns and energy-efficient transport and proposed urban health indicators related to urban ambient pollution, urban burden of disease, pedestrian and bicyclist deaths and access to modern energy sources. See http://www.who.int/hia/health_indicators/en/

Global Task Force of Local and Regional Governments for Post-2015 (May 2013) also recommended developing a set of goals and targets related to inequalities, culture and the environment, with indicators that localize the global agenda, and reflecting the vision of Local and Regional Governments. See http://www.uclg.org/sites/default/files/NY%20Communiqu%C3%A9%20FINAL.pdf

Global Consultation on Population Dynamics, Outcome Document (June 2013) recommended four targets for liveable and sustainable cities for growing populations: (1) access to essential amenities and services, e.g. land, public space, housing, water, sanitation, energy, health and education; (2) strengthened linkages between rural and urban areas and within cities through infrastructure development; (3) minimized environmental impact through limiting urban sprawl and promoting energy efficient buildings and infrastructure; and (4) systematically use population data and projections for planning. See http://www.iom.int/files/live/sites/iom/files/What-We-Do/docs/Outcome-Report-Pop-dynamic-and-post-2015-dev-agenda-14-March-2013.pdf

Habitat for Humanity (June 2013), in its analysis of the High Level Panel's Report to the Secretary General, reiterated its recommendation that adequate housing and slums be included explicitly amongst the sustainable development goals and targets.

Mainstreaming urbanization The High Level Panel, in its Report to the Secretary-General, (May 2013) identified urbanization as a significant trend that must be harnessed if sustainable development is to be achieved at a global scale. 'This matters because inclusive growth emanates from vibrant and sustainable cities, the only locale where it is possible to generate the number of good jobs that young people are seeking.' Furthermore, '[t]he post-2015 agenda must be relevant for urban dwellers. Cities are where the battle for sustainable development will be won or lost.' It thus recommends 'a local, geographic approach to the post-2015 agenda', 'disaggregating data by place and giving local authorities a bigger role in setting priorities.' Cities are one of six important cross-cutting areas to be reflected across multiple goals. See http://www.un.org/sg/management/pdf/HLP_P2015_Report.pdf

The United Nations Global Compact (June 2013) also lists urbanization as a key to addressing resource scarcity and access to infrastructure and services. See http://www.unglobalcompact.org/ docs/news_events/9.1_news_archives/2013_06_18/UNGC_Post2015_Report.pdf

Previous Open Working Group sessions with specific relevance to cities - e.g. employment, food security and nutrition, health, population dynamics and water and sanitation - have articulated, to varying degrees, their intrinsic connections with cities. Some have proposed specific urban targets. Future OWG sessions on the topics of infrastructure, energy, governance, transport and sustainable consumption and production also provide the opportunity to explore urban linkages and their subsequent reflection in goals and targets

III. The way forward

In the quest for sustainable development, a focus on cities and human settlements is unique because it foregrounds space and place as well as the subsidiarity of local government. Cities constitute the arena where action is concretized. As engines of growth they are transformative; they concentrate the institutions and infrastructure required to bring about change. As hubs of peer-to-peer learning and knowledge sharing they are integrative; their championing of innovative approaches strengthens institutions and builds capacities. As homes for a majority of the world's people, they are universal. One promising way to reflect this in the development of an SDG on sustainable cities would be to highlight core targets not addressed in other SDG proposals. These unique targets (e.g. urban sprawl, public space, slum reduction, shelter, safety - particularly of women, youth, children and LGBT people -- mobility, resilience and air pollution reduction) might form the basis of a dedicated SDG on cities.21

To help forge consensus, the development of an SDG on sustainable cities might also incorporate emerging themes and recommendations from the Thematic Consultations held over the past year. For example, the Consultation on Population Dynamics highlighted that by anticipating urban growth and leveraging agglomeration advantages cities can accommodate increased demographic demands - including the youth bulge - at the same time as they strengthen linkages to rural regions. Participants in the Inequalities Consultation suggested that cities tackle urban segregation through inclusive policies and participatory decision-making that includes children. In Environmental Sustainability, participants highlighted the need to address unplanned urbanization, rural-urban migration and the disaster risks it drives as well as evolving climate conditions. And in Governance, participants discussed localizing sustainable human development.

Alternatively, the OWG might consider constructing a dedicated goal on cities along the lines of the issues discussed in paragraphs 134-7 of The Future We Want. These paragraphs outline the following urban subthemes: affordable housing, infrastructure and slum upgrading; cultural heritage and urban revitalization; participatory decision-making; urban safety and health; sustainable transport and energy and green space; water and sanitation; resilience; urban planning and design; and partnerships for sustainable urban development.

Beyond the SDG process itself, achieving sustainable cities will require interlinking different sectoral challenges and adopting more relevant, evidence-based policies based on population data.22 It will also require better awareness-raising and participation, especially of women, youth and the poor, in efforts such as city-wide slum profiling and household counting.23 Cities must continue to challenge the dominant model of urbanization that is based on cheap fuel, minimal regulation and gated communities as quick fixes for shocks, instability and crime. Prioritizing mixed uses, non-motorized transit and cohesive public space will help. Many cities and metropolitan areas are already investing in innovation, modernizing their infrastructure and capitalizing on their efficiencies.24 Countries should also support them by adopting proactive national urban policies and enhancing the capacities of urban actors to address the challenges of city-regions. To achieve post-2015 sustainability, cities will also need to better engage the real estate industry to share land value and kerb speculation. They will have to adopt more sustainable business models for the equitable delivery of services. And they will have to plan and design more innovatively for even greater resource efficiency. But they cannot do it alone.

21 These topics will be explored further in a LAMG-hosted expert group meeting planned for 5-6 December in

New York 22 Such data should be disaggregated by spatial unit (e.g. city, neighbourhood, district) as well as by demographic

Issues Brief 21: SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT

1

Summary - Key Messages While transport is central to development many people in rural and urban areas do not have access to affordable, safe and clean transport. Transport services and infrastructure will be required to enable the mobility of people and goods needed for inclusive economic and social development and improved quality of life. Transport is central in shifting to sustainable low carbon societies but needs to be decoupled from impacts like air pollution, congestion, road traffic injuries and climate change. Key sustainability issues are: Rural and urban transport, air quality, road safety, and energy and climate.

x Urban transport systems can be improved through the development of well-designed mass transit systems linked with safe and attractive facilities for cycling and walking. An SDG target should be to double the number of people with access to affordable, quality mass transit.

x Rural transport services are critically important to development and agriculture. Halving the number of people without roads or adequate transport services has been proposed as a target. A target also needs to be developed for all-weather roads to serve the rural population.

x Urban air pollution is a major threat to global human health, especially small particulates. The transport sector can lead in implementing an SDG target to bring the air quality of 1.5 billion people within WHO guideline limits, which can be achieved with existing technologies and policies.

x Road Safety is deteriorating and has become one of the main killers of pedestrians, young and vulnerable people. Many cities and countries have shown that achieving an SDG target of halving road fatalities worldwide is achievable.

x And transport plays an important role in using energy more efficiently and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The SDGs should include a target to double the efficiency of the global vehicle fleet. These targets can be achieved using existing cost effective policies and technologies - many cities and countries have already achieved them. They need to be scaled up through inclusion of transport targets in the SDGs.

Introduction

Transport involves everyone, every day, whether it is through walking, cycling, using public transport, driving a car, or through air and sea travel. Transport is central in goods movement and crucial for development and economic growth. It provides access to work, education, health services, and other public services. It also provides access to markets and supply chains. International transport of goods between countries is important for development and lack of infrastructure can increase costs and externalities.

Current trends are still too focused on individual car use, exclude large groups in providing affordable quality mobility, are fossil fuels intensive, and have many negative effects such as road traffic injuries and climate change. Rio+20 recognised Sustainable Transport as an important area for follow-up and international support to developing countries. The High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the post-2015 Development Agenda included transport in two goals associated with energy and employment. Several Consultations have been undertaken on Sustainable Transport with many supporting the idea of "equitable access to goods and services through clean, safe, affordable, reliable transport and land use planning."

Figure 2: Proportion of countries with policies to encourage non-motorised transport (WHO 2013)

I. Stocktaking

Greenhouse gas emissions from the transport sector are growing faster than any other sector and are estimated to increase from one quarter today to one-third of all energy related CO2 emissions by 2050 (IEA 2012). At the same time, over 1.2 million people were killed on roads in 2010 (WHO 2013) and small particulate outdoor air pollution is estimated to result in more than 3.2 million premature deaths annually (Lim, 2012). Many cities in all regions of the world have come to a complete gridlock due to congestion, having major impacts on economic development. Nonetheless a growing number of countries and cities spearhead innovative solutions and showcase how transport can be more sustainable.

Paragraph 133 of the Johannesburg Plan of Action calls for the development of "sustainable transport systems, including energy efficient multi-modal transport systems, notably public mass transportation systems, clean fuels and vehicles, as well as improved transportation systems in rural areas". It also calls for support to developing countries to achieve this. However, as transport was not included in the MDGs and its targets, over the past decades the transport sector has not been given the attention it should and many transport related problems have increased. The development of a post 2015 framework provides an opportunity - a last chance that is - to integrate transport as a driver for sustainable low carbon societies.

Switching to a sustainable integrated transport approach needs special attention to related areas such as financing and infrastructure. Societies need to redirect investment in infrastructure that supports sustainable transport. So rather than investing (only) in highways - include dedicated bus lanes for bus rapid transit systems, and integrate safe walking and cycling facilities when building or upgrading urban roads. And invest in integrated goods transport - linking land (including rail) with sea transport. The resilience of transport infrastructure is also important in light of climate change adaptation. Transport infrastructure and systems should be adapted to extreme weather and global sea level rise - especially as transport infrastructure investments require a long time horizon. Proper adaptation is not only important for reliable transportation of people but also for the global delivery of goods, including energy and food.

Options - Making Transport Sustainable

The ultimate transport goal is to give citizens access to goods and services while minimizing negative external effects such as traffic injuries and emissions. This can be realized through an "Access-Shift-Improve" (ASI) approach: (i) provide equitable Access to jobs, goods and services while avoiding unnecessary motorized trips by smarter planning; (ii) Shift the transport of goods and persons to the most efficient mode, and; (iii) Improve the efficiency of transport by improved vehicle and fuel operations and technologies. Using and ASI approach can make transport sustainable in the following ways.

x Transport is a key driver for poverty reduction and social inclusion. Well-designed transport systems provide mobility for all groups in society. However, in many countries affordable mass transit systems do not exist, forcing people to pay a relative large share of their income on transport or restricting their access to workplaces, school and friends and family. Well designed , intermodal

Figure 4: BRT and busway systems in the world (WRI, 2013)

transport systems are essential for the provision of goods and services, including food. Doubling the number of people with access to mass transit or non-motorized transport within an average half hour daily commute has been proposed. Similarly access to transport by road or other means in rural areas within a half hour walk has also been proposed.

x Cleaner transport systems can improve the health of billions of urban residents. The transport sector is a major source of outdoor air pollution. In cities around the world, transport is often the main source of air pollution. Many different types of air pollutants have adverse health impacts, and especially small particulates, called PM 10 and PM2.5. PM pollution penetrates deep into the lungs and blood stream and is a major cause of heart and respiratory disease, and also a leading cause of cancer (IARC, 2012). According to the WHO PM pollution affects more people than any other pollutant (WHO 2011). Rio+20 called for the reduction of non-communicable respiratory diseases. Growing reliance on private vehicle travel is also a key driver of physical inactivity- increasing the risk to related to non-communicable diseases (NCDs).

x Transport provides cost effective opportunities to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions. Today the knowledge, policies and technologies are available to shift towards a more sustainable low carbon transport pathway. And we can do this while saving resources: mass transit can provide mobility for many, reducing the need to build additional roads; the efficiency of the global vehicle fleet can be doubled using existing policies and technologies saving billions of dollars in fuel; building walking and cycling paths in our cities only costs a few percentage points of road investment.

The future of the transport sector will see major changes. New models will be introduced that share vehicles and that will focus on inter-modal connectivity, new technologies will be low and no-carbon, and the use of IT will provide new opportunities. Only by providing an integrated approach to the transport sector, rather than focusing on different modes in isolation, can the sector contribute optimally to the recovery of economic development, greater productivity, a low carbon society and a healthier population.

Trade, goods and services will benefit from better interconnected inter-modal and cross border transport especially for Land Locked Developing Countries (LLDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS). Using inland and coastal waterways and modal shifts to rail, moving away from infrastructure attempting to support an unsustainable road focused transport model, all provide clear climate, movement and cost benefits for the freight sector. And will provide sustainable solutions to rural access with local resources.

II. The way forward

There are several key areas where the transport sector is fundamental to achieving sustainable development:

1-

Access to integrated urban transport systems and improved rural roads

By default or design, world-wide transport systems are still mainly based on private car use. A move from individual car use to public transport is needed, to address congestion, improve access and for environmental reasons. Integrated urban transport systems involve walking, cycling, cars, buses, and mass transit systems. Important is the feed-in of non-motorized transport into mass transit systems. Mass transit systems should

Proposed mass transit SDG target - double the number of urban citizens that have access to integrated mass transit systems by 2030. This can be achieved by supporting the up-scaling of mass transit systems, using innovative financing models. Many organizations are supporting countries and cities to develop mass transit systems but much more effort is needed to scale up this model. A similar target could be developed for access to all weather roads for rural populations.

Figure 3: PM levels in selected cities (WHO)

be affordable so that they provide maximum access - especially to the poor and other groups like children and people with a disability. Moreover, the lack of safe and affordable transport restricts the mobility of women and prevents their full participation in the economy and other activities. Urban transport systems need to be designed based on participatory approaches to maximize usage. In Latin America major cities such as Bogota have showcased bus rapid transit systems - that are capable of quickly and safely transporting many people in and out of the city. In many regions, and especially in Asia, despite the introduction of mass transit systems more needs to be done to maximize their use through better integration of other transport modes, especially non-motorized transport. In Africa there is an urgent need to expand the current number of only three BRT systems - many cities and countries are planning mass transit systems.

Rural transport systems provide development opportunities of the rural areas, including access to food and income, especially for the small scale agricultural sector. Cities depend on transport systems to provide them with food and other resources from the rural areas. Therefore, more attention should also be given to the integration of urban-rural and regional and inter-city transport development.

2-

Urban Air Quality

Urban air pollution is a major killer and getting worse in many cities. Small particulate is one of the largest health hazards globally (WHO 2011). A recent study shows that at least 3.2 million people die prematurely every year from outdoor PM pollution (Lim, 2012). Today many large cities far exceed WHO guidelines for average PM10 concentrations (see Figure 3). A recent European Environment Agency study estimates that more than 90% of people living in European cities breathe air that result in respiratory problems, heart disease and shortened lives (EEA, 2013). Overall, transport is responsible for the largest share of PM emissions in cities. An important cause for this is the use of dirty fuels and vehicles - for example in OECD countries diesel fuel contains as little as 10 parts per million (ppm) sulfur, while in Africa many countries are above 5,000 ppm. On the vehicles side, the introduction of progressive vehicle emissions standards is essential, as is the regulation of the export of used vehicles to developing countries. Introduction of cleaner fuel and cleaner vehicles - personal vehicles, two and three wheelers, and buses and freight - can help address this. Together with mass transit systems, safe walking and cycling networks this can create a cascade of health benefits - better pedestrians safety, improved physical activity, and dramatically improved urban air quality. Reducing small PM has as added benefit that it also reduces black carbon, an important short lived climate pollutant.

Figure 5: Predicted growth CO2 emissions of the global fleet (GFEI 2011)

3-

Road safety

1.24 million people are killed every year and 20 to 50 million are injured and disabled due to road traffic accidents. Road traffic injury is the leading cause world wide of death for young men aged 15-29 yrs. In East Africa road fatalities are more than 7 times higher than in some European countries. In the past twenty years road deaths have increased in Sub Saharan Africa by over 80% (WHO, 2013). In Latin America, the majority of these deaths occurred among vulnerable road users, pedestrians accounting for almost one-third.

In 2011 the UN Decade of Action for Road safety was launched through a UN General Assembly resolution with the support of more than 100 governments. Its Global Plan promotes proven cost effective solutions such as better designed roads, with facilities for non-motorised transport users, application and enforcement of strict regulations such as on vehicles road worthiness and seat belts, and safer roads use, such as through speed reductions. More mass transit systems would also assist in reducing road traffic accidents.

4-

Energy

and Climate

Transport is a major consumer of fossil fuels. Today's global vehicle fleet is estimated at around one billion vehicles, and is set to double or even triple in the coming decades, with 90% of this growth taking place in non-OECD countries (see figure 1). Improving the efficiency of vehicle fleets has many positive impacts - reduced greenhouse gas emissions, reduced energy dependence, reduced oil and fuel use, and cheaper and cleaner transport. There is a large group of countries, OECD and non-OECD, that have put in place measures to improve the fuel efficiency of their vehicle fleet. These countries are making major progress with reducing fuel consumption - currently at a rate of close to 7% improvement per year

(GFEI/IEA 2012). However a similarly large group has not put in place measures and their average fuel economy is not improving at all. With the vehicle fleets expected to grow especially in these "stagnant" countries, the global fleet CO2 emissions are set to double or triple - while these could be halved if fuel economy policies would be introduced globally (see figure 5). The Sustainable Energy for All and the High Level Panel report both recommend improvement of fuel economy as a priority for better energy efficiency.

Proposed energy and climate SDG target - Double the efficiency of the global fleet, in 2030 for all new vehicles and by 2050 for the complete global fleet. This can be achieved through the global adoption of fuel economy policies. The UN is working with leading global transport partners in the Global Fuel Economy Initiative that is working towards this target at global and national level worldwide.

Proposed health and road safety SDG target - to reduce road fatalities by half by 2030. This can be achieved if countries adopt a set of road safety measures outlined in the Global Plan of Action. Many organizations are working to implement the Decade of Action plan to achieve this.

Proposed air quality and health SDG target - Bring urban air pollution within WHO limits for an additional 1.5 billion urban residents by 2030. This can be achieved if countries would adopt low sulphur fuel standards and introduce progressive vehicles standards reducing 90% or more of harmful emissions (ideally hand in hand with other transport interventions promoting public and non-motorized transport). Leading global UN based initiatives such as the Climate and Clean Air Coalition and the Partnership for

Clean Fuels and Vehicles are supporting this.

These four priority targets are by no means the only transport actions that need to be undertaken. Moving towards sustainable transport systems needs actions in many more areas. A post 2015 sustainable development framework should consider additional activities and targets in following areas:

x The logistics and freight sector combines land, air and maritime. Freight movement comprise of one third of transport energy use, three-quarter of this is land-based (IPCC 2007). Freight is a disproportionate high emitter of black carbon (because of its use of heavy duty diesel engines). However, there are excellent freight and logistics initiatives improving the efficiency and reducing harmful emissions.

x Non-land based transport - 90 percent of the global trade volume is carried by sea. Ships are closely linked to on-shore activities, especially ports and land freight transport systems. Targets should be set to continue reducing pollutant, building on existing agreements, with a special focus on PM and climate emissions - both CO2 and black carbon. The aviation sector is fully dependent on fossil fuels and while long term strategies need to look at alternatives, at the short term much efficiency improvements can be made including in operations at airports and through clean technology and better planning. In Europe short-haul flights are being shifted to high speed rail with significant benefits.

x Subsidies - that promote the use of unsustainable transport modes - in particular fossil fuel subsidies - should be removed. Fossil fuel subsidies were estimated at more than USD 400 billion in 2010 and provide a major draw on public funds in many countries. Although intended to assist the poor, fossil fuel subsidies benefit more the wealthy.

x Sustainable biofuels - use of biofuels for transport is increasing, often due to government policies promoting their use. Threats are the displacement of food crops for fuel crops, the expansion of agricultural land into ecosystems rich in biodiversity or carbon, or displacement of small holder agriculture. Appropriate policies need to be put in place to avoid these externalities. Technologies focused on converting waste or sustainably harvested non-food crops are promising.

For all of these issues time is of the essence. There is only a small window of opportunity to introduce the necessary measures - it takes time for mass transit systems to be designed and build, it takes time to change urban planning paradigms and it takes time for new vehicles to replace old fleets.

For these actions to be successfully addressed several conditions need to be met.

x Transport needs to be given the political priority it deserves, as a social, economic and environmental issue and as an opportunity to contribute to sustainable development; with a paradigm shift from a focus on individual motor vehicle users to integrated multi modal transport approaches for people and goods.

x New approaches and technologies will need to be fast tracked and shared among countries. These include congestion charging, e-pricing, zoning, zero or low emissions vehicles, bike and car sharing programs, active (non motorized ) travel mode schemes.

x Major investments are taking place in transport - in the next decades hundreds of trillion of dollars will be spent on building transport infrastructure and in fuels and vehicles. Switching to a sustainable low carbon and resilient transport sector needs the existing investments to be redirected and be more sustainable. Seed funding is needed to support countries develop new transport approaches and strategies and adjust their financial and investment policy climates to support sustainable transport. Multilateral Development Banks, bilateral agencies and the UN can be called upon to assist with this shift in investment patterns.

x Governments need to work with the private sector and civil society to switch to more sustainable transport models. Though innovative public -private partnerships and through taking leadership the private sector can become a driving force to make transport efficient, affordable and cleaner. NGOs and knowledge organizations have been taking the lead in promoting alternative models and scenarios. There is a wealth of knowledge and experience, at all levels, that can be used to achieve more sustainable transport systems.

x Capacity building and exchange of knowledge and technologies will be key pillars.

x And a move to a more sustainable transport sector will need coordinated action at all levels; at the city level - with introduction of integrated urban transport systems; at national level - setting cleaner fuels and vehicles standards; at regional level - for much needed harmonization; and at the global level - where knowledge and technology need to be shared and where UN agencies play a central role in promoting more sustainable transport systems.

The transport community is diverse; governments are cooperating with non governmental organizations, the private sector, knowledge institutions and international organizations to develop transport programs as outlined in this brief. A feature of some of the most successful programs is that they have involved all these groups in global and national activities. It is important, with such a diverse group of involved organizations, that coordination is effective. The transport community is now discussing, also on the basis of this brief, the development of a results framework that will provide clear targets and indicators for the role of transport in the post 2015 SDGs.

Recognizing the importance that the transport sector plays in achieving sustainable development, transport interventions as suggested in this brief should be combined into one dedicated SDG, as they are closely interlinked. However, most important is that the key areas and targets as listed in this paper are included in the SDG framework.

Transport can make key contributions to all three pillars of sustainable development - economic, social and environmental. To do so it needs to be part and parcel of the post 2015 framework. There is no second chance, once cities have planned and developed, roads have been built, vehicle fleets have grown, it will be too late and far more costly to develop retrofit solutions. There is a short window of opportunity to shift to sustainable transport systems and the development of the SDGs provides an ideal opportunity to do this.

References

x The global burden of disease study 2010, The Lancet 2012, http://www.thelancet.com/themed/global-burden-of-disease

x IARC: Diesel engines exhaust carcinogenic, International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), 2012, http://www.iarc.fr/en/media-centre/pr/2012/pdfs/pr213_E.pdf

x Lim SS et al., A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010, The Lancet, 2012

x Hosking, J., Mudu, P., Dora C., Health co-benefits of climate change mitigation - transport Sector, WHO 2011

x Global Report on Road Safety, WHO, 2013, http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_status/2013/report/en/index.htm l

x Global Fuel Economy Initiative (GFEI), www.globalfueleconomy.org

x Transport, Energy and CO2: Moving toward Sustainability, International Energy Agency (IEA), 2012 http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/name,3838,en.html

x World Resources Institute (WRI), 2013, www.brtdata.org

Issues Brief 22: SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION, INCLUDING CHEMICALS AND WASTE1

Introduction

Addressing current unsustainable patterns of consumption and production is imperative for the achievement of sustainable development in a world in which human population is projected to be 9,5 billion by 20502, and in which about 1.2 billion people currently live in extreme poverty and deprivation.3 Changing consumption and production patterns is vital for poverty and hunger eradication, and also for protecting and managing the natural resource base and ecosystems, which underpin development. Healthy ecosystems are vital for human well-being and resilience particularly of those living in poverty. Currently, over 60 percent of the ecosystems and their services upon which we rely are degraded, overexploited or already lost.4 Unsustainable consumption and production patterns are increasing water and air pollution, land and forest degradation, waste generation and the use of harmful chemical substances. Current pressures on the planet's natural resources and life support systems will increase with population and economic growth unless consumption and production patterns become more efficient and less polluting. Economic growth will have to be decoupled from resource use and environmental degradation, so that inclusive socioeconomic development can be sustained.

I. Stocktaking

Achieving sustainable patterns of consumption and production is central to the sustainable development agenda. Chapter 4 of Agenda 21 recognized, in 1992, that "the major cause of the continued deterioration of the global environment is unsustainable patterns of consumption and production, particularly in industrialized countries". Principle 8 of the Rio Declaration called for states to "reduce and eliminate unsustainable patters of production and consumption and promote appropriate demographic policies", which need to be human rights based and gender sensitive. The Johannesburg Plan of Implementation (JPoI) of the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD), and The Future We Want of the Rio+20 Conference in 2012, both recognized that "poverty eradication, changing unsustainable patterns of production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource base of economic and social development are overarching objectives of, and essential requirements for, sustainable development". The JPoI called for the development of a ten-year framework of programmes in support of regional and national initiatives to accelerate the shift towards sustainable consumption and production (SCP) to promote social and economic development within the carrying capacity of ecosystems. At Rio+20, world leaders adopted the Ten-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns (the "10YFP").5

Chemicals and waste management are closely related to sustainable consumption and production. Several multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) are being implemented, including the Vienna

1 Prepared by the TST drafting group on SCP with inputs from the 10YFP Inter-Agency Coordination Group (IACG)

2 UN Population Division. World Population Prospects 2013 revision 3 World Bank. 2013. Global Monitoring Report 2013: Rural-urban dynamics and the Millennium Development

Convention and its Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, the Basel Convention on Hazardous Waste, the Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure, and the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. The WSSD adopted the 2020 goal of producing and using chemicals in ways that help minimize significant effects on human health and the environment. The Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM) serves as a cross-sectoral, multistakeholder initiative supporting achievement of the WSSD 2020 goal, and the Minimata Convention on Mercury will be adopted in October 2013. Nevertheless, the Rio+ 20 outcome document notes that many countries, in particular the least developed countries and Small Island Developing States (SIDS), lack the capacity for sound management of chemicals and waste, implying the need for additional capacity building and technology transfer efforts.

Escalating resource use. Globally, increasing resource use, waste and pollution are undermining prospects for future development. There is also an inequitable use of resources and distribution of the impacts of pollution and environmental degradation - between the wealthy and the poor, urban and rural populations, and men and women. Consumption and production patterns in most economic sectors have to change significantly to address these challenges. During the twentieth century, total material extraction grew by a factor of about eight, while GDP rose 23-fold and world population almost quadrupled. Ores, minerals, hydrocarbons and biomass are currently being extracted at an annual rate of 60 billion tonnes.6 As economies expand and populations grow, material extraction is set to increase to 140 billion tonnes annually by 2050, if developed countries' rates of consumption do not change and developing countries follow a similar pattern.7 Similarly, an increase of food production of about 60 percent is needed between 2000 and 2050 to satisfy expected increase in demand,8 especially for resource-intensive and energy-dense foods. However, such an increase could be avoided if current very high rates of food losses and waste are reduced or prevented.

Environmental impacts. Many environmental challenges result from unsustainable production and consumption patterns. These include the continuous and increasing conversion of natural ecosystems for agriculture, the fragmentation of habitats, loss of biodiversity and degradation of various ecosystem services, overfishing, unsustainable agricultural practices and overexploitation of other renewable resources on which people and economies depend. Diverse negative environmental impacts are caused by various extractive and processing industries, as well as by waste disposal, especially dumping and burning around urban areas. Pollution damage is degrading ecosystems that provide key services underpinning human welfare, and often impacts directly on human health and economic productivity. The release of chemicals continues to affect the atmosphere, water, soil, wildlife, ecosystems and our food chain, with associated impacts on human health. Chemicals released to the atmosphere act as pollutants, contributing for example to acid rain, as greenhouse gases and as ozone depleters. They also contaminate water resources through direct discharges to bodies of water or via deposition from the air.

Waste generation is projected to increase dramatically in the next dozen years, from 1.3 billion tonnes per year today to 2.2 billion tonnes per year by 2025, with high increases in middle-income

6 UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2011. Decoupling natural resource use and environmental

impacts from economic growth. A Report of the Working Group on Decoupling to the International Resource Panel. Fischer-Kowalski, M., Swilling, M., von Weizscker, E.U., Ren, Y., Moriguchi, Y., Crane, W., Krausmann, developing countries.9 In developing countries, 50-70 percent of waste is organic, much of which could be used to produce energy and fertilizers (through methanization and composting). This implies that only a fraction of current waste volumes should go to final disposal. Some of the foregoing impacts can be addressed by well-designed, high-density and mixed-use cities, which reduces their resource and wider ecological footprint - about 67 percent of the global human population will live in cities by 2050.10

Economic and social consequences. Current pressures on the planet's natural resources and life support systems will increase with population and economic growth unless consumption and production patterns become more efficient and less polluting. Poorer communities, depending directly on their local environment and associated natural resources, are the most vulnerable to these impacts. Marginalized groups such as small food producers, indigenous people and women will have increased difficulties to access natural resources as these will be scarcer and more costly. They require secure access to natural resources and support to develop and apply more sustainable production systems.

The increased frequency and intensity of climate change-induced extreme weather events caused by unsustainable patterns of consumption, including energy use, directly counteract poverty and hunger eradication efforts. Poor management of chemicals is incurring multibillion dollar costs worldwide - many of which are not borne by manufacturers or producers, but instead by workers, vulnerable populations and society as a whole. For example, costs incurred due to asbestos and contaminated drywall materials total over USD125 billion worldwide - and the figure is still rising. The global benefits from the phase-out of leaded fuel, including the economic and health benefits, amount to USD2.45 trillion, or 4 percent of global annual GDP.11

In many least developed and developing countries, as well as countries with economies in transition, resource-inefficient economic growth is holding back development efforts. Embracing SCP policies, strategies and applications could offer opportunities to leapfrog to a more resource-efficient, profitable and cleaner development trajectory, enhancing net gains from economic activities. Economic benefits can arise directly from policies promoting SCP as these can help increase the amount of natural, physical and human capital available, increase efficiency, and stimulate innovation12.

Governance. Inclusive and evidence based governance, based on broad and equal participation, non-discrimination and accountability, is key to achieving SCP patterns. Unfortunately, policy responses often neglect the interconnectedness of challenges, resulting in fragmented approaches. Responses from governments may be uncoordinated because different departments are responsible for different but interlinked issues. An adaptive, interconnected and responsive institutional framework, including policies, laws, financing, technology, diverse stakeholders and practices should, in the words of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, help connect the dots between various sustainable development challenges. These include climate change, water scarcity, energy shortages, global health, food security and women's empowerment. "Solutions to one problem must be solutions for all."13

9 World Bank. 2012. What a waste: a global review of solid waste management. Washington, DC. 10 UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2012. Sustainable housing for sustainable

Enabling conditions should be created for innovations and emerging solutions by using a mix of regulations and economic instruments, new and existing technologies, empowerment of stakeholders, and more adaptive approaches. These tools need to be deployed across traditionally segmented institutional management and production systems, to achieve more sustainable consumption and production patterns.14

The complexity, magnitude and interconnectedness of sustainable development challenges does not mean that decision-makers are faced with the stark choice of "doing everything at once in the name of integrated approaches or doing nothing in the face of complexity." Identifying interlinkages offers immediate opportunities for more effective responses at local, national, regional and global levels.15

II. Overview of proposals

SCP16 and chemicals and waste management were not explicitly included in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). However, these important objectives should be addressed in this current round of goal-setting. SCP offers opportunities to attain vital development goals, on a sustained basis, and improve quality of life by promoting efficient, responsible and clean production systems, and sustainable lifestyles. Conversely, unsustainable consumption patterns and management of chemicals and waste can impede achievement of these goals17 and impacts on human health directly.

The 10YFP provides a global, cooperative framework to help accelerate the shift towards SCP patterns in both developed and developing countries. Objectives of the 10YFP include contributing to resource efficiency and decoupling economic growth from environmental degradation and resource use, while creating decent job and economic opportunities and contributing to poverty eradication and shared prosperity. The framework will also support capacity building and facilitate access to financial and technical assistance on SCP for developing countries.18

Some MEAs refer to SCP, such as the Aichi Targets adopted by the Convention on Biological Diversity (COP 10). Target 4 reads "By 2020, at the latest, Governments, business and stakeholders at all levels have taken steps to achieve or have implemented plans for sustainable production and consumption and have kept the impacts of use of natural resources well within safe ecological limits". Other goals from international agreements are relevant such as those on reducing greenhouse gas emissions of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and those on sustainable land management of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). The Montreal Protocol's contribution to eliminating consumption and production of ozone-depleting substances, and those of the various chemicals conventions and SAICM, all further the sound management of chemicals, often in the context of product life cycles.

Progress on SCP would contribute to achieving key objectives and goals on food security and energy, such as those spelt out in the Secretary-General's initiatives. The Zero Hunger Challenge has five main objectives: to achieve 100 percent access to adequate food all year round; to end malnutrition

14 UNEP. 2007. GEO-4 Summary for Decision Makers (SDM (available at

http://www.unep.org/geo/GEO4/media/GEO4%20SDM_launch.pdf). 15 Ibid.

16 United Nations. 2013. Report of the High Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development in pregnancy and early childhood; to make all food systems sustainable; to increase growth in the productivity and income of smallholders, particularly women; and to achieve a zero rate of food waste. The Sustainable Energy for All Initiative (SE4All) sets out the vision and has three linked objectives - energy access, renewable energy and energy efficiency - designed to achieve the goal of sustainable energy for all by 2030. The UN Decade of Education for Sustainable Development's basic vision is of "a world where everyone has the opportunity to benefit from education and learn the values, behaviour and lifestyles required for a sustainable future and for positive societal transformation". Initiatives launched for this decade, such as the UNESCO-UNEP led YouthXChange, are specifically oriented towards achieving SCP patterns.

Underscoring the importance of SCP in industrial production, 21 national governments from Asia adopted the Ministerial "Manila Declaration on Green Industry in Asia", which in turn led to launching the UNIDO-UNEP Green Industry Platform.19

III. The way forward

Achieving SCP patterns and decoupling socio-economic development from rising resource use and environmental degradation require major changes to production systems, employment patterns and technologies in every country, as well as accompanying behavioural changes influencing consumption. International human rights standards mandate these changes by, for example, calling for international cooperation for development, including the prevention and mitigation of the negative impacts of environmental harms, guaranteeing the right of all persons to benefit from scientific progress, and demanding protection of basic rights, including the rights to food, health and water.

Improving access to natural resources and moving to more resource-efficient and less pollution-intensive food production systems will, for example, contribute to long-term food security and nutrition, through rural development, sustainable agriculture and land management which are more socially inclusive. Recycling and recovery of electrical and electronics equipment, or e-waste, can reduce impacts on public health, recovering precious metals and other valuable resources. Sustainable infrastructure and energy systems, cities and transport systems, all part of the shift to SCP, will also contribute to climate change mitigation and disaster risk reduction and can reduce inequalities.

Achieving SCP patterns will require a mix of policies, integrating economic, social and environmental objectives, and engaging and building the capacity of stakeholders to drive the necessary transformative change of the economy. Achieving the shift will require the following actions, including avoiding the rebound effect whereby efficiency gains are cancelled out by resulting increases in consumption. In particular, policy- and decision-makers will need to:

x Address the drivers of unsustainable consumption and production patterns such as lack of knowledge and know-how, investment or technologies for sustainable production, limited product life spans, product prices not reflecting true resource, environmental and social costs, high consumer demand, limited incentives for recycling and reuse, and the absence of sustainable alternatives or reliable consumer information.

x Adopt a life-cycle approach, aiming at resource efficiency and increased supply and demand of sustainable products, which avoids burden shifting between different stages of product life cycles.

Achieving SCP patterns will also require: x Mainstreaming SCP in decision-making at all levels - through national plans on SCP, or integrating SCP objectives into relevant national plans and strategies and sectoral policies;

x Designing policies and legal frameworks that take into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development, cultural factors and sectoral priorities of countries, guided by related indicators for measuring the shift towards SCP;

x Addressing "market failure", through regulation and pricing that internalizes environmental and social costs, and incentives for innovation, international cooperation and investment in SCP;

x Actively engaging all stakeholders, notably the private sector (including farmers, small-scale producers), workers' organisations, women, and the informal sector, as well as researchers, educators, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and consumers;

x Consumer education and awareness-raising to shift to more sustainable lifestyles and products, especially as the largest cohort of youth ever will shortly move into adulthood;

x Changing approaches and perspectives on waste to shift from end of-pipe solutions to reduce, reuse, recycle (3R) approaches, which close material loops and reduce resource extraction needs;

x Innovation, technological change, skills upgrading and access to environmentally sound technologies that need to be fostered and facilitated- and which offer major opportunities to deliver vital services more efficiently to more people at lower cost;

x Greater emphasis on resource productivity, involving structural change towards less resource-intensive activities and broad diffusion of efficiency-enhancing technologies, including through measures such as environmental tax reforms and the phasing out of environmentally harmful subsidies;

x Addressing inequalities that result in poor, marginalized, minority groups and women bearing disproportionate impacts from current consumption and production patterns; and

x Ensuring a smooth transition through policies that encourage investment and employment creation in environmentally friendly economic sectors while reducing the costs of adjustment.

All of the foregoing actions and objectives will also contribute to safer management of chemicals and more sustainable waste management. The options of avoiding use or preventing release of toxic chemicals, by using safer alternatives, will generally offer far safer and cheaper options than remediating chemical hazards, including their health impacts on current and future generations. Similarly, volumes of waste and their negative impacts can be dramatically reduced by the design and use of more efficient and longer-lasting products, and recycling of waste. Recycling one tonne of paper, aluminium or glass can respectively save more than 600 kg, 10 tonnes and 500 kg of CO2 equivalent.20

More research, development and diffusion of cutting-edge technology for SCP, and partnerships, including with business, will also be required. Making this global shift will require leadership from developed countries, as recognized in a number of international declarations.21 The High Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda identified the need for an equitable and sustainable approach to managing these consumption and production patterns, and joint mobilization of economic, social and environmental action, to irreversibly reduce poverty (emphasis added). 22

20 UNEP. 2010. Waste and climate change: global trends and strategy framework (available at

Sustainability and long-term thinking: Rio+20 recognized the need for elaborating sustainable development goals building on the MDGs. Attaining the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will require a combination of policies, international cooperation, capacity-building and technical assistance directed towards long-term sustainability, as well as a strengthening of the implementation of MEAs. A truly integrated set of policies and actions will be required from all stakeholders influencing consumption and production patterns. This will entail consideration of the interlinkages between different goals and economic sectors as well as an integrated approach to social, economic and environmental objectives.

Central objectives should be improving and sustaining the quality of life and health for all, while decoupling socio-economic development from escalating resource use and environmental degradation. SDGs could importantly address critical issues such as irreversible damage to the global environment, and key "tipping points" that trigger feedbacks leading to "runaway" negative impacts. Targets and indicators for the goals could be designed to promote such decoupling and improve resource efficiency throughout product life cycles, increasing recycling and reducing waste, thus reaping important economic gains and higher contributions to human welfare.

Interlinkages of policy responses: There is a need for an interlinked approach to policy responses. In developing the SDGs, it will be important to consider carefully complex interlinkages among them, both mutually reinforcing and competing, and to develop integrated goals. SCP can contribute to progress on social goals or poverty reduction without an increase in the global use of resources, materials and chemicals and, thereby, sustain this progress over time. This involves production processes becoming increasingly clean and efficient and wealthier consumers becoming more aware of the impacts of their consumption patterns, and adjusting them accordingly, supported by systemic efforts to correct market failures and introduce regulation. The SDGs could take the form of a limited number of integrated goals - that embody the social, economic and environmental aspects of sustainable development - and could be underpinned by a mix of targets, some integrating all three objectives, and others emphasizing one or two of them. Such goals could retain a tight focus on development, while embodying targets and indicators that promote a decoupling of economic development from the depletion of natural resources and environmental degradation.23

Universal relevance: SCP is a universal concept. In developed countries, it implies shifting towards more resource- and energy-efficient economies and more emphasis on adopting sustainable lifestyles that reduce overconsumption. The concept recognizes the needs and capabilities of developing countries, as well as the opportunity they have to leapfrog to more resource-efficient, environmentally sound and competitive practices and technologies. In all countries, more resource-efficient production processes result in lower costs and important economic savings for business, governments and civil society, when long term benefits and impacts are factored in. International cooperation in the context of the 10YFP, and on the finance, innovation and technologies required to achieve SCP, is essential to progress towards sustainable development goals.

Capacity building for SCP: A broad array of capacity-building activities and international cooperation, including the 10YFP, will be crucial for the design and implementation of government policies and private sector management practices, adoption of technologies and delivery of information tools and education for consumers to trigger the shift towards SCP patterns. The specific capacity building needs of the least developed countries and SIDS need particular consideration. The UNIDO/UNEP-supported Resource Efficient and Cleaner Production Network, with over 50 members worldwide, working with companies and governments to scale up sustainable production practices, will be a key delivery mechanism for such capacity building.24 The Rio+20 outcome document recognized that the green economy is one of the important tools available for achieving sustainable development, and that green economy policies should promote SCP.25 The design and application of SCP indicators, which could orient "integrated" SDGs to achieve the necessary decoupling of economic development from environmental degradation and resource use, could have a key role in guiding policies and actions to support sustainable development. The diverse range of policies, actions and capacity-building required does in any case imply the need for a truly integrated effort from governments, the UN system and their partners to achieve the shift to SCP patterns.

Issues Brief 23: CLIMATE CHANGE AND DISASTER RISK REDUCTION

1

I. Stocktaking

Climate change and disaster risk are fundamental threats to sustainable development and the eradication of poverty. The negative impacts threaten to roll back decades of development gains. Building resilient and sustainable societies means addressing both climate and disaster risks, and integrating these risks, as well as potential opportunities, into development planning and budgeting.

Currently, as decades of disaster risk data show, more than 226 million people globally are affected on average by disasters associated with natural hazards every year. These include both geo-physical events (e.g. earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanos) and hydro-meteorological events (e.g. floods, cyclones, droughts). Weather-related disasters comprise about 81 per cent of all events, causing 72 per cent of all economic losses and 23 per cent of fatalities.

As outlined in the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report, the impacts of climate change on sustainable development are observed through both slow-onset events (e.g. sea level rise, increasing temperatures, ocean acidification, glacial retreat and related impacts, salinization, land and forest degradation, loss of biodiversity and desertification) and extreme weather events. Climate change represents one of the biggest threats to food security in the 21st century. Its impacts are already disrupting livelihoods in many parts of the world, particularly those that are dependent on predictable temperature and rainfall, clean water availability, and arable land. Sea level rise will also increasingly affect coastal communities by exacerbating erosion and leading to loss of land and coastal industries.

As outlined in the IPCC's Special Report on Extreme Events and confirmed in its recently released Fifth Assessment Report, climate change is already impacting the nature of natural weather-related hazards, leading to more frequent and/or intense extreme events, and will only further exacerbate natural hazards in the coming decades.2 This has the potential to further increase the number of humanitarian crises. Mortality rates from weather and climate-related disasters are decreasing in most regions, in many cases due to ongoing disaster risk reduction, including early warning and emergency preparedness activities. At the same time, however, the number of people affected by disasters is increasing, and economic losses are rising, partially due to the changing nature of weather-induced hazards from climate change. Economic losses now regularly exceed $100 billion annually and are projected to double by 2030. Since 1980, risk of economic loss due to floods has increased by over 160 per cent and to tropical cyclones by 265 per cent in OECD countries. In fact, risk of economic loss due to floods and cyclones in the OECD is growing faster than GDP per capita.3

Natural hazards destroy lives and livelihoods, and have long-term consequences for human and economic development. The detrimental impacts of these events on development have been seen over and over, with destruction of lives and livelihoods setting back development progress and increasing levels of poverty-or forcing new groups into poverty.

As a result, both disasters and climate change are increasingly being considered and integrated as part of a development continuum, instead of as isolated phenomena. While hazards are natural,

1 Prepared by UNDP, UNEP, UN-ESCAP, UNFCCC, UNISDR and WMO with contributions from FAO, IFAD, ITU,

OCHA, PBSO, UNCCD, UN-DESA, UN-ESCWA, UNFF, UNFPA, UN-Habitat, UNIDO, UNOOSA, UN-Women, WFP, disasters are not. The scientific community has pointed out that the current drivers of risk are linked to poor policies and practices in land-use planning, governance, urbanization, natural resource management, ecosystem management as well as increasing poverty levels.4 For example, the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment found that many of our essential ecosystems are being used unsustainably, thereby reducing their capacities as natural buffers to provide protection against hazards, which is essential in protection and sustainability of livelihoods.5 Further, these risks are only increasing. By 2050, 70 per cent of the world's population is expected to live in urban areas, two thirds of this in low- and middle-income nations. Much of this growth is taking place in locations already prone to earthquakes, cyclones, floods and droughts.

These risks posed by both disasters and slow-onset processes will have the biggest impact on the poorest and most marginalized - be it through gender inequality, age, disability or any other intersecting vulnerability - who are the most susceptible to the risk. The interconnectedness of risk posed by climate change and disasters with poverty reduction, social protection, and sustainable development makes a strong case for the need for adaptive, inclusive, equitable, risk sensitive and climate and disaster resilient development.

Links between Climate Change, Disaster Risk Reduction and Sustainable Development Over the last 30 years there has been an evolving recognition that action on climate change and disaster risk reduction is a prerequisite for achieving sustainable development. Emphasis has been placed on incorporating both climate change action and disaster risk reduction needs into development mechanisms, such as public investment planning systems, sectoral development plans, and social protection and infrastructure investments.

Following the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, 2002), and guided by the Hyogo Framework of Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disaster (HFA) and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), among other processes and General Assembly resolutions, disaster risk reduction and climate change action, including mitigation and adaptation, are seen not only as an imperative to protecting investments in development, but also as an opportunity for a transformative shift towards more resilient development. The United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development held in 2012 (Rio+20) renewed the international community's commitment to sustainable development and also emphasized the importance of tackling poverty, climate change and disaster risk in an integrated manner. In particular, it called for better coordinated strategies that integrate disaster risk reduction and climate change considerations into public and private investment, decision making and planning of humanitarian, post-recovery, and development actions.

As a result of these and other global commitments, extensive efforts have been underway for the past few decades to address climate change and disaster risk in the context of development. Comprehensive risk reduction and mitigation and adaptation policies and practices have been designed and implemented in many countries around the world, closely integrated into national and sub-national development processes. Furthermore, efforts have also been ongoing to reduce greenhouse gas emissions which are contributing to the climate change, in the hope of minimizing impending impacts. These climate change mitigation efforts are extremely relevant to adaptation and risk reduction given their impact on natural resources and production and consumption patterns, including energy systems, agricultural practices and forestry management. An important shift is emerging that recognizes climate change as an opportunity for green growth and low-carbon economies alongside co-benefits and building resilience.

Global efforts to strengthen action on climate change and disaster risk reduction as part of the international development agenda

In recent years, progress has been achieved at the global level to help guide and drive regional and national processes on climate change and disaster risk reduction.

In 2010, at the 16th Conference of the Parties (COP 16) of the UNFCCC, Parties committed to a global goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions so as to hold the increase in global average temperature below 2 Celsius, and to consider a 1.5 Celsius limit in the near future. Through the Cancun Agreements adopted at COP 16, Parties to the UNFCCC also established a series of institutions for implementing this agreement. These included: a) the Cancun Adaptation Framework, which introduced National Adaptation Plans, a work programme on Loss and Damage, and the establishment of the Adaptation Committee to coordinate implementation of adaptation; b) a Technology Mechanism consisting of the Technology Committee and Climate Technology Centre and Network to increase design, development and dissemination of climate-friendly technologies; and c) the establishment of the Green Climate Fund to manage financing in support of developing countries' actions on climate change; Also, developed countries expressed their broad agreement to mobilize 100 billion USD per year both for adaptation and mitigation by 2020. Further, under the Cancun Agreements all industrialized nations formally submitted mitigation pledges and have committed themselves to develop low-carbon development plans or strategies. A number of developing countries have also initiated the development of nationally appropriate mitigation actions (NAMAs) which present opportunities for developing low carbon growth strategies At the Durban Climate Change Conference in 2011, Parties established the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action, identifying the path toward a future legal climate framework that will cover all countries. A process is now underway to prepare text for agreement in 2015 that would outline a new "protocol or another legal instrument on an agreed outcome with legal force," for the period beyond 2020. Under the Second Commitment Period of the Kyoto Protocol launched in Doha in December 2012, developed countries listed in Annex-I committed themselves to reduce their average GHG emissions by 18 per cent in the 2013-2020 period.

Similarly, the HFA serves as the global framework for international cooperation on disaster risk reduction as a foundation for national, regional and international development agendas. The overall expected outcome of the HFA is the "substantial reduction of disaster losses, in lives and in the social, economic and environmental assets of communities and countries", and is supported by three strategic goals, five priorities for action, and four cross-cutting issues. 6 The HFA serves as the guideline for countries and various other stakeholders, to contribute to the achievement of the internationally agreed goals through 2015. Consultations on a post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction (or HFA2) are already underway, and supported by the international community's commitment for "disaster risk reduction and the building of resilience to disasters to be addressed with a renewed sense of urgency in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication".

There are also a number of well-established inter-governmental agreements outside climate change and disaster risk reduction policy processes that clearly support and deliver disaster risk reduction and adaptation outcomes as 'co-benefits'. These include, among others, the UN Convention on Biological Diversity,7 the UN Convention to Combat Desertification,8 the Ramsar Convention,9 and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,10 the Committee on World Food Security, which recognize the importance of maintaining healthy ecosystems for supporting livelihoods, economic growth, and increasing local resilience.

While there are several global frameworks currently addressing issues related to climate change and disaster risk, there are also considerable - but uneven - efforts at the national and sub-national level in terms of implementation. Focusing on climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction, implementation has been channeled through integrated policies and plans, joint working groups, and comprehensive activities on the ground. Efforts are also underway to strengthen the linkages between climate change, disaster risk reduction and other relevant issues such as food security, health, traditional knowledge, gender and humanitarian responses, bringing different communities of practice together at all levels to guide and implement integrated approaches. This reflects the inherent cross-cutting nature of climate change and disaster risk, and the importance of integrating solutions for poverty reduction, gender equality, disaster risk reduction and climate change to ensure lasting solutions to global vulnerabilities and achieving sustainable development.

With these interconnections and opportunities for more effective measures in mind, coherence between the post-2015 development agenda, HFA2, and the 2015 climate change agreement is necessary to deliver sustainable and well-planned development outcomes beyond 2015. Specifically, the HFA2 and climate agreement can provide important instruments for implementing the aspirations of sustainable development goals.

II.

Overview of proposals

Lessons from the HFA can provide guidance on goals and targets given its experience setting up frameworks for the DRR community. The HFA Mid-Term Review and the third session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction in 2011 recognized that targets encourage more accelerated implementation, as well as greater accountability of action. Further, while generic targets and indicators have been developed under the HFA in consultation with countries, challenges have been faced in translating these targets into consistent efforts across countries. These challenges include: difficulty measuring targets given the cross-cutting nature of disaster risk reduction, limited connection with existing goals/targets of development frameworks like the MDGs, lack of access to data collection and monitoring tools; and the lack of recognition of disaster risk reduction as a development principle.

Building on these lessons, several proposals for integrating issues related to both climate change and disaster risk reduction into the Sustainable Development Goals framework have been made to date. Generally speaking, climate change proposals have been integrated into more than one goal, reflecting the broad scope of climate change - covering both mitigation and adaptation activities - and its close links to many different development sectors, such as energy, water, and food security. There are a number of disaster risk reduction proposals currently available, 11 and they provide ideas for both integrating targets related to disaster risk reduction across multiple goals or creating a stand-alone goal on disaster risk reduction.

Climate Change In the report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda (HLP), climate change is reflected in four of the 12 clusters of indicative goals suggested. Cluster 7 on Secure Sustainable Energy is directly related to climate change, covering issues such as renewable energy, energy efficiency and access to energy, as well as fossil fuel subsidy reform. Other clusters present issues that are relevant to climate change, though do not reference climate change explicitly. These clusters are related to: enabling environments and long-term finance, deforestation and land degradation, sustainable management of natural resource assets, and sustainable agriculture as it relates to food security and nutrition. The HLP report does not suggest numerical values for many of the quantitative goals.

The Leadership Council of the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), in its report for the UN Secretary-General,12 proposes 10 goals, one of which is to "curb human-induced climate change and ensure sustainable energy". The targets suggested under this goal focus on decarbonizing the energy system, reducing non-energy emission through improved practices in various sectors and the adoption of incentives. Other suggested goals relevant to climate change include improvement of agricultural systems, empowering resilient cities, securing ecosystem services and biodiversity, and ensuring good management of water and other natural resources. This report also does not suggest numerical goals and targets.

The report Corporate Sustainability and the United Nations Post-2015 Development Agenda, submitted by the UN Global Compact based on consultations and surveys with businesses globally, looks at energy and climate under an area named "the resource triad". It notes that water and sanitation, energy, and food and agriculture are tied to the causes and effects of climate change. Goals in each of these areas are related to climate change, with the most significant being the goal on sustainable energy for all. Targets do not focus on emissions, but rather focus on renewables, energy efficiency, energy access and particulate concentrations, suggesting possible numerical values for these.

The Centre for International Governance Innovation and the Korea Development Institute's report Post-2015 Development Agenda: Goals, Targets and Indicators includes a recommendation to have a climate change target with indicators that include total emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), total emissions of greenhouse gases, and CO2 emissions per capita and per GDP. The report also includes targets on other areas that are related to climate change under an overarching goal on "Sustainable Management of the Biosphere, Enabling People and the Planet to Thrive Together". These targets relate to biodiversity, energy and planetary boundaries.

Disaster Risk Reduction The report by the HLP suggests that risk sensitive development must be at the heart of the post-2015 development agenda. The next sustainable development framework would effectively address disaster and climate risk if it includes a goal/target on overall loss of life and economic losses as well as related targets under the main potential sectoral goals that contribute to risk reduction, for example related to water, education, environment and health.

Three options emerge among existing proposals on how to address disaster risk reduction. 13 One option is to have a standalone goal on disaster risk reduction supported by a limited number of targets on social, economic and environmental issues. These targets could be reducing economic losses, preventing impoverishment, reducing mortality, morbidity and disability, early warning information and services, and protecting and improving health systems. A second option is to have targets related to disaster risk reduction in broader topics, such as poverty reduction, gender equality, governance, or tackling obstacles to development, supported by one or more specific targets. The third option is to have a resilience goal in which disaster resilience would be one of a number of targets oriented around shocks, encompassing natural hazards, food chain emergencies, transboundary or technological threats, socio-economic crises, violent conflicts and protracted crises, among other aspects.

In May 2012, the UN System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda produced a thematic think piece on Disaster Risk and Resilience that set-out an initial proposal for a global goal and targets to address disaster risk and resilience in the context of sustainable development. This was based on the recognition that disaster risk and resilience is a programming principle that needs to be better reflected in future development goal and target regimes.14

Calls have been made for HFA2 to accelerate efforts by the development community to be responsive to different population groups and achieve a net reduction in all forms of risk in order to address public and private investments that are contributing most to the growing exposure to disasters. This would promote a new development approach that integrates disaster risk considerations into all development interventions. To build socio-economic and ecological resilience, there is a need to integrate knowledge and tools that address shocks, stresses, vulnerabilities, and changes arising not only from disasters from natural hazards, but also from climate change and environmental degradation, as well as from disasters that are man-made including violence and conflicts, financial and economic failures, and health crises.

It should be noted that measuring progress against a quantitative goal and targets related to life and economic loss due to disasters requires an acceleration of efforts by countries to record disaster losses. A large number of countries now maintain disaster loss databases in Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia, Europe and the Arab States region. Analysis of these datasets have helped understand the patterns of extensive risk across these regions and informed the global discourse on disaster reduction.

III.

The way forward

Addressing climate change and disaster risk in sustainable development goals will help ensure that these goals will be maintained and achieved in the face of changing climatic conditions and disaster events, and prove to be truly sustainable.

The current model of development needs to be realigned to the changing world in order to address climate change and disaster risk. The concept of resilience offers the international community an opportunity to break down the silos within the development agenda and focus on a common, crosscutting and coherent outcome. This requires consideration and action on climate change and disaster risk across all policies and sectors, and at all levels of decision-making, given their multiple linkages with all aspects of sustainable development.

Addressing the dual and inter-related challenges of climate change and disaster risk is one of the most critical necessities for the sustainable development agenda beyond 2015. Climate change is multi-dimensional, and difficult to capture in any one sustainable development goal. Disaster risk reduction is also a cross-cutting issue that is intricately tied to different elements of sustainable development. As a result, to address climate change and build resilience to disaster and climate impacts, a multi-stakeholder, multi-sector approach is needed. Addressing the underlying causes of climate change and disaster risk requires engagement with actors involved in all relevant development sectors, including, inter alia, education, health, agriculture, environment, transportation and communications, ICTs, energy, land use planning, rural and urban development and local government, and across different communities, from politicians and community leaders, to public authorities, scientific community, academia and policy-makers, to households, civil society and the private sector.

A unique opportunity exists in 2015. Specific attention to climate change and disasters in sustainable development goals will ensure the required coherence between climate negotiations and a successor to the Hyogo Framework for Action. This will enable the international community to commit to an inclusive, equitable, risk aware and comprehensive approach to sustainable development for generations to come.

Issues Brief 24: OCEANS AND SEAS

1

I. Stocktaking

Oceans, seas and coastal areas form an integrated and essential component of the Earth's ecosystem and are critical to sustainable development. The oceans cover more than two-thirds of the earth's surface and contain 97% of the planet's water.2 In "The Future We Want", Member States stressed the importance of "the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and seas and of their resources for sustainable development, including through their contributions to poverty eradication, sustained economic growth, food security and creation of sustainable livelihoods and decent work, while at the same time protecting biodiversity and the marine environment and addressing the impacts of climate change".3 This statement refers to the strong linkages between the oceans and other priority areas currently under consideration while developing the future sustainable development agenda. Member States have consistently recognized in the General Assembly resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea the important contribution of the sustainable development and management of the oceans and seas to the achievement of international development goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration.4

Oceans contribute to poverty eradication by creating sustainable livelihoods and decent work in fisheries and marine aquaculture, shipping and shipbuilding, ports, tourism, oil, gas, mining, and maritime transportation industries. At least 90 % of the volume of global trade is seaborne.5 Over three billion people depend on marine and coastal resources for their livelihoods.6 Women represent the majority in secondary activities related to marine fisheries and marine aquaculture, such as fish processing and marketing. In many places, employment opportunities have enabled young people to stay in their communities and have strengthened the economic viability of isolated areas, often enhancing the status of women in developing countries.7 Coastal tourism and recreation contribute to economic growth in both developing and developed countries by creating job opportunities and providing an important source of income and foreign exchange earnings. Approximately half of all international tourists travel to coastal areas. In some developing countries, notably Small Island Developing States (SIDS), tourism can account for over 25% of GDP.8 Oceans also hold considerable potential to provide economic growth and jobs in emerging sectors such as offshore renewable energy9 as alternative to carbon-based energy, as well as in transitioning to more sustainable shipping, fishing and marine aquaculture operations.

Oceans are crucial for global food security and human health. They provide food and nutrition, directly through fishing and marine aquaculture, and indirectly through animal feeds. As a valuable

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is co-chaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. Preparation of this issues brief has been co-led by DESA, ESCAP, FAO, UNDP, UNEP, UNESCO-IOC, World Bank, with contributions from CBD Secretariat, IAEA, ILO, IMO, OLA/DOALOS, OSAA, UNOOSA, UN Women, WMO and WTO.

2 UNDP (2012): Catalyzing ocean finance - Volume 1. 3 A/RES/66/288 (2012): The Future We Want - Outcome Document of the Rio+20 Conference. 4 See for example General Assembly resolutions 63/111, 64/71, 65/37 A, 66/231 and 67/78. 5 IMO (2012): International Shipping Facts and Figures: Information Resources on Trade, Safety, Security,

Environment. 6 Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2012): Booklet: Biodiversity for Development and source of nutrition globally, fish provide 4.3 billion people with about 15 per cent of their intake of animal protein.10 The protein and trace elements present in animal feeds and derived from aquatic sources make intensive food production systems possible. With one in eight people in the world today being undernourished and approximately two billion suffering from micronutrient deficiencies11, combined with the anticipated growth in the world population to 9.6 billion people by 205012, responsible and sustainable fisheries and marine aquaculture have an essential role to play in ensuring food security and nutrition for all. Fish also contain important trace elements that are critical for brain development and growth in children. The potential value of marine biotechnology is considered high, but has yet to be estimated accurately.13

Oceans are the primary regulator of the global climate and an important sink for greenhouse gases. They provide us with water and the oxygen we breathe. Oceans have a role in climate change mitigation as they capture and store about 30% of carbon dioxide produced by humans.14 They absorb a majority of the sun's radiation and their surface currents redistribute heat around the world, thus enabling humans to live on this planet. Marine phytoplankton produces 50% of the oxygen on Earth.15 The majority of rain that falls on land originates in the oceans, giving us water for drinking, hygiene and sanitation, agriculture and industrial development.16 In the future, desalinated seawater could become an important source of freshwater.

The manifold employment opportunities, as well as ecosystem services, including cultural services, provided by the oceans, create the conditions for a global oceans-based economy, which is estimated at between USD 3-6 trillion/year.17

Yet, there are increasing, complex challenges in preserving and maintaining healthy, resilient and productive oceans for the prosperity of present and future generations. Coastal regions and SIDS are particularly vulnerable to these challenges as the oceans play a central role in their culture, while at the same time being tightly linked to their economies. Main threats to the oceans can be divided into five broad categories:

1. Unsustainable extraction of marine resources, which includes overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing and destructive fishing practices as well as the usage of harmful subsidies that contribute to IUU fishing and overcapacity. Already today, 30% of the world's fish stocks are over exploited, while more than half are fully exploited.18 Inappropriate deployment and deployment in the wrong areas of fishing gear can result in mortalities of endangered, threatened and protected species, including marine mammals (e.g. dolphins), sea turtles and birds, as well as in the damaging of critical and vulnerable marine habitats. Abandoned, lost and otherwise discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) also capture and kill through a process of ghost fishing, contribute to degradation of fishing grounds and habitats, and represent a threat to navigation and safety of life at sea. Unsustainable extraction of marine living resources, including by-catch, is an important threat to the food chain in the oceans and to global food security, health and sustainable livelihoods. The unsustainable extraction of marine non-living resources (e.g. deep sea mining; offshore oil and gas drilling) is also cause for concern.

10 FAO (2012): The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. 11 FAO (2012): The State of Food Insecurity in the World. 12 UNDESA (2012): World Population Prospects: the 2012 Revision. 13 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Series (2005): Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Current state and

trends. 14

2. Marine pollution, which originates from a number of marine and land-based sources, including riverine discharges, agricultural and industrial run-off, urban outfalls, municipal or industrial wastewater, atmospheric deposition, illegal or indiscriminate dumping, accidents (e.g. oil spills), fishing operations, maritime transport and off-shore construction. Marine pollution occurs in the form of heavy metals, persistent organic pollutants (POPs), pesticides, nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus), plastics, oil, hazardous substances, radioactive materials, and anthropogenic underwater noise. More than 80% of marine pollution is derived from land-based sources. Coastal settlements are growing, with some of the largest urban agglomerations based in coastal areas. Agriculture, in particular excessive and inefficient use of nitrogen fertilizers, can create low oxygen "hypoxic" conditions, harmful algal blooms and dead zones (over 500 globally).19 At the same time, ocean-based sources such as ALDFG occur mostly in and around fishing grounds and become a hazard to marine life and navigation. Globally, an average of 13,000 pieces of plastic litter are estimated to be afloat on every square kilometer of ocean20, with a potential to kill sea birds, sea mammals and fish each year, many of which are endangered, threatened or protected under national and international law.21 3. Alien invasive species, which have been transported into areas where they do not occur naturally (e.g. jellyfish), for example in ship ballast water or by attaching to exterior hulls, as 'hitch-hikers' clinging to scuba gear or packaging, carried by other organisms and via the aquarium industry. In favourable conditions, they may outcompete local marine species, in most cases threatening complex food webs and/or fouling marine infrastructure with negative impacts on marine ecology, local economies, food security and human health.

4. Ocean acidification and climate change impacts, which are caused by increasing atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations. Negative effects of climate change include increased frequency and intensity of weather and climate extremes22, ocean warming, sea-level rise, as well as changes in ocean circulation and salinity. They hamper the life-sustaining and regulating functions of the oceans, threaten marine biodiversity and negatively affect the sustainable development of coastal communities. Ocean acidification has increased by 26% since the beginning of the industrial revolution23 and may have potentially devastating impacts on marine ecosystems, including loss of shellfish, coral reefs and calcareous plankton, the base of much of the marine food chain. SIDS and coastal regions are particularly affected by sea-level rise, coastal flooding and erosion, and extreme events (e.g. tsunamis and storm surges) due to undermined natural protective barriers, low levels of development combined with rapid population growth in low lying coastal areas and inadequate capacity to adapt. Sea-level is expected to continue to rise due to a combination of thermal expansion of seawater, melting of glaciers and other snow/ice, and continued increases in groundwater extraction.

These challenges require enhanced (gender-sensitive) vulnerability and impact assessments, mitigation and adaptation plans, resilience building and disaster risk reduction strategies. Significant progress has been made in the establishment of observation and early warning systems at the national and regional levels, which have, together with improved effective emergency preparedness and response planning, resulted in a significant reduction of lives being lost. However, not all coastlines are yet covered. Space technology and its applications, including climate products and services at the regional and sub-regional scale, can play an important complementary role.

5. Physical alteration and destruction of marine habitat, which are caused by unsustainable coastal area development (e.g. direct construction on reef platforms), submarine infrastructure

19 Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2010): Global Biodiversity Outlook 3. 20

(e.g. submarine cables), unsustainable tourism, fishing operations in fragile or vulnerable marine areas (e.g. seagrass beds, coral reefs) and physical damage from ship groundings and anchors. Major marine ecosystems have been degraded or are being used unsustainably.24 An estimated 20% of global mangroves have been lost, 19% of coral reefs have disappeared, and 29% of sea grass habitat has vanished.25

Oceans host huge reservoirs of biodiversity. They are characterized by a number of complex ecosystems such as mangroves, coral reefs and wetlands, pelagic waters, seamounts, submarine ridges and the seafloor itself, which host marine life and form marine habitats. At Rio+20 Member States recognized the importance of the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction. Under the MDG framework the oceans-related target 7.B of MDG7, which aimed to reduce the rate of biodiversity loss by 2010, has not been met. While progress has been made to develop and facilitate the use of diverse approaches and tools, including the ecosystem approach, the establishment of marine protected areas consistent with international law and based on scientific information, including representative networks and time/area closures for the protection of nursery grounds and periods, further efforts will be required to reach Aichi target 11 that, by 2020, 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas are conserved. The achievement of Aichi targets 6 and 10 will also play an important role in reversing the alarming trend of biodiversity loss and overfishing.

Considerable progress has been made toward the oceans-related targets and goals set out in Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation (JPOI), particularly by enhancing scientific understanding and monitoring, and strengthening legal and policy frameworks, institutions and cooperation mechanisms. Nevertheless, further work is required building on previously made commitments. In this regard, it is recalled that United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) lays down a comprehensive regime of law and order establishing rules governing all uses of the oceans and their resources. It enshrines the notion that all problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be addressed as a whole, while at the same time providing the framework for further development of specific areas of the law of the sea.

Despite a steady increase toward universal participation in UNCLOS, the Part XI Agreement and the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement, effective compliance with, and enforcement of, their provisions remains a challenge, in particular for developing countries and especially for SIDS, given the disproportionally large ocean areas under their jurisdiction, which require capacity development. At Rio+20, parties to UNCLOS and the United Nations Fish Stock Agreement were urged to fulfil their obligations and to advance implementation. Member States also reiterated their commitment to conclude multilateral disciplines on fisheries subsidies that will give effect to the mandates of the World Trade Organization Doha Development Agenda and the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to strengthen disciplines on subsidies in the fisheries sector.26

The provisions of UNCLOS and its implementing agreements27 are supplemented by various other Conventions28 and instruments29 adopted by competent intergovernmental organizations, agencies,

24 IOC/UNESCO, IMO, FAO, UNDP (2011): A Blueprint for Ocean and Coastal Sustainability. 25 UNDP (2012): Catalyzing ocean finance - Volume 1.

26 Paragraph 173, A/RES/66/288 (2012): The Future We Want - Outcome Document of the Rio+20 Conference. 27 Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of UNCLOS; Agreement for the Implementation of the

Provisions of UNCLOS relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly bodies and entities. The General Assembly reviews on an annual basis development in ocean affairs and the law of the sea and it has established a number of processes30 to assist it in this work. The General Assembly has consistently called for a number of actions to address the threats mentioned above in its annual resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea and sustainable fisheries.

Within the UN system, there have been initiatives and reports31 that can provide useful background information. The implementation of regional programmes32 can offer valuable lessons as many of them already contain indicators to monitor their objectives and goals33.

II. Overview of proposals

A broad range of oceans-related issues were addressed in Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation (JPOI) and the Barbados Programme of Action. Oceans-related goals and targets can also be drawn from the MDG framework with its target 7.B of MDG7 and its two ocean-related indicators: 7.4 proportion of fish stocks within safe biological limits and 7.6 proportion of terrestrial and marine areas protected. Furthermore, the Rio+20 outcome document contains several oceans-related goals. In "The Future We Want", Member State parties were urged to fully implement UNCLOS and the 1995 Fish Stocks Agreement and other relevant international instruments.

Relevant goals and targets can also be found in the annual resolutions of the General Assembly on oceans and the law of the sea and on sustainable fisheries, as well as in the decisions and resolutions of a number of competent international organizations. For example, the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity for 2011-2020 adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, contains the oceans-related Aichi targets 6, 10 and 11.34

More recently, in the discussions on sustainable development goals (SDGs), proposals have been made to try integrating oceans issues into SDGs. The first set of proposals aims at developing a dedicated stand-alone Sustainable Development Goal on Oceans. The second set of proposals revolves around addressing ocean-related issues in a cross-cutting manner under different SDGs.

(A)

A stand-alone Sustainable Development Goal on Oceans

Proposals for a stand-alone Sustainable Development Goal on Oceans35 recognize the fundamental

29 See for example UN Agreement on Port State Measures and Int. Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and

Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing; Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries; Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities; Int. Plan of Action for the Management of Fishing Capacity; Int. Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing.

30 See for example United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the

Sea; Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction; Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment, including Socio-Economic Aspects.

31 See for example IOC/UNESCO, IMO, FAO, UNDP (2011): A Blueprint for Ocean and Coastal Sustainability;

Global Partnership for Oceans: http://www.globalpartnershipforoceans.org/; UNDP (2012): Catalyzing ocean finance; IMO (2013): Concept of a Sustainable Maritime Transportation System.

32 See for example UNEP's Regional Seas and GEF Large Marine Ecosystem programmes, Pacific Oceanscape. 33importance of oceans for sustainable development. They stress that oceans issues require focused attention due to their complex nature and significant contribution to the three dimensions of sustainable development. In the outcome of the recently held inter-regional preparatory meeting for the Third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, Member States underscored that the achievement of healthy, productive, and resilient oceans is crucial. They concluded that oceans should be prominently reflected in the SDGs and the post-2015 agenda, including through consideration of a thematic Sustainable Development Goal on Oceans.

(B)

Inclusion of oceans-related aspects in different sustainable development goals

Proposals for the inclusion of ocean-related aspects in different SDGs in the form of targets recognize the importance of oceans, but consider that they should be dealt with in a cross-cutting manner.36 Two categories of inclusion can be found: (1) Inclusion in SDGs that relate to a healthy and resilient planet and productive ecosystems, environmental sustainability, respect for planetary boundaries and/or the maintenance of the global commons. (2) Inclusion in SDGs that relate to determinants of human well-being, such as food security and good nutrition.

III. The way forward

In 2013, the report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda emphasized that, without environmental sustainability, poverty cannot be ended and that the oceans and seas should not be forgotten in the development of a post-2015 development agenda.37

In "The Future We Want", Member States noted that the new SDGs should focus on priority areas for the achievement of sustainable development, while being guided by the outcome document, of which oceans comprised a considerable part.

The majority of existing proposals made with regard to oceans in the context of SDGs are based on the common understanding that the achievement of healthy, productive and resilient oceans is indispensable to poverty eradication and sustainable development. In this regard, and despite the fact that other ocean-related topics remain of utmost importance, the following elements could be taken into closer consideration, which are based on the "The Future We Want":

x

Ensure conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and seas and of their resources:

Effectively apply an ecosystem approach and the precautionary approach in the management, in accordance with international law, of activities having an impact on the marine environment; Meet the 2015 (JPoI) target on an urgent basis and maintain or restore all fish stocks at least to levels that can produce the maximum sustainable yield, in the shortest time feasible, as determined by their biological characteristics; Develop and implement science-based management plans, including by reducing or suspending fishing catch and fishing effort commensurate with the status of the stock; Enhance action to manage by-catch, discards and other adverse ecosystem impacts from fisheries, including by eliminating destructive fishing practices; Eliminate, prevent and combat IUU fishing; Eliminate subsidies that contribute to IUU fishing and overcapacity; Implement area-based conservation measures, including marine protected areas.

x Reduce the incidence and impacts of marine pollution, including marine debris, especially plastic, persistent organic pollutants, heavy metals and nitrogen-based compounds, from a number of marine and land-based sources; take action to achieve, by 2025, based on collected scientific data, significant reductions in marine debris to prevent harm to coastal and marine environment.

x

Prevent introduction of alien invasive species and manage their adverse environmental impacts.

x Address ocean acidification and the impacts of climate change: accelerate the reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions; prevent further ocean acidification; adapt to climate change; enhance resilience of marine ecosystems and coastal communities; reduce disaster risk and build resilience to natural disasters.

Effective implementation and the bridging of implementation gaps, strengthened compliance and enforcement together with the adoption of necessary measures, including through the development of national, regional and global action plans, strategies, policies, institutional and fiscal reforms as well as protocols, would contribute to better addressing the ongoing challenges on the path towards sustainable development. In particular, the strengthened compliance with, and enforcement of, UNCLOS and its implementing agreements, as well as the other instruments adopted by competent international organizations, specialized agencies, Funds and Programmes and other relevant bodies, would significantly contribute to the protection, conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and their resources, including through the promotion of capacity-building, cooperation in marine scientific research, and the transfer of marine technology.

Capacity-building programmes, when tailored to the needs of the different regions and aimed at human resource development, knowledge transfer and the strengthening of institutional capacity in the law of the sea and marine affairs, including planning, management and monitoring capacities, can have significant impacts. Together with the transfer of marine technologies which are accessible, affordable and adaptable to needs and particular circumstances of countries, such capacity-building programmes will play an important role on the path to sustainable development. To increase citizen engagement, dedicated oceans-related curricula should be an essential part of education for sustainable development to raise public awareness and change consumer behavior.

Improved governance, political will and the targeted allocation of sufficient resources will be essential to the achievement of SDGs, including a possible stand-alone goal on oceans. The building of an improved interface between science and decision-making in oceans-related issues and the proper valuing of goods and services provided by marine and coastal ecosystems are likewise essential. New financing mechanisms that leverage available funding and increase efficiency in development aid, public private partnerships, together with investments in the oceans-based economy, can play an important role. As the various basins of the oceans are interconnected, even smaller projects can have significant impacts on a global scale. The promotion of decent work and respect for international labour standards38 can further contribute to improve labour conditions for women and men, safety of navigation and maritime security, thus not only protecting seafarers, fishers and their communities, but also ensuring their effective stewardship of the marine environment and resources.

It will be crucial to improve our knowledge about the state of the oceans and marine ecological processes. In 2014, the first World Ocean Assessment under the Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects, will provide decision makers with timely information. Understanding changes in the oceans in real time is vital in order to enable timely and effective responses. The creation of an enabling environment is crucial, including through maintaining and expanding ocean observation, data management and information systems39. Additional centers for the coordination of scientific activities at global scale40 would be beneficial. The need of adapting to climate change and supporting climate-sensitive sectors (e.g. fisheries, tourism) in coastal regions and SIDS will require the development of information products and services based on climate predictions.

Increased cooperation and (cross-sectoral) coordination among all stakeholders at local, national, regional and global levels are crucial toward a new global partnership for sustainable development, especially in the areas of technical and scientific cooperation, information sharing and resource mobilization.

While the manner in which oceans will be dealt with in the future SDG framework is yet to be defined (stand-alone goal or cross-cutting inclusion), these elements are crucial in the way forward.

40 See for example Ocean Acidification International Coordination Centre (OA-ICC).

Issues Brief 25: FORESTS

1

I. Stocktaking

1.a. The Importance of All Types of Forests and Trees outside Forests for Sustainable Development

Forests are vital to achieving global sustainable development. They provide solutions for addressing many development challenges including poverty eradication, environmental sustainability, food security and agriculture, energy, clean water and watershed protection, biodiversity conservation, mitigation of and adaptation to climate change, combating desertification and land degradation, and disaster risk reduction. Forests are vital for creating green economies, including green industries. More than 1.6 billion people worldwide depend on forests for food, medicines and fuel, as well as their jobs and livelihoods. The concept of sustainability was first coined in forestry science 300 years ago (Schmithsen 2013), initially referring to the renewal and growth of trees and then expanded to the social, economic and environmental dimensions of forest management.

Globally, forests cover 31% of global land area (FAO 2010); they contain over 80% of the world's terrestrial biodiversity (Hassan et al. 2005) and store more carbon than the atmosphere (FAO 2005). Healthy and resilient forests play a critical role in climate change mitigation and adaptation. As the largest storehouse of carbon after the oceans, forests have the potential to absorb and store about one-tenth of global carbon emissions projected for the first half of this century into their biomass, soils and products. As vital sources of energy, water, livelihoods and biodiversity, forests also play a critical role in climate change adaptation by supplying the ecosystem services that society depends on.

As part of larger landscapes, forests are intrinsically connected with other components of landscapes such as water, agriculture and biodiversity, just to name a few. Forests and trees outside forests provide multiple goods and services, including timber, paper, and numerous other products, as well as non-wood forest products (NWFP). Over 10 million people are employed in the formal forest sector (FAO 2010), and forests also provide employment to many seasonal workers in informal sectors around the world.

Forests make direct and tangible contributions to food security. Studies show that forests provide indirect yet reliable resources to fight poverty, particularly for the more vulnerable categories of people such as indigenous communities and women (Sam & Shepherd 2011). Rural communities often utilize a dual income-generating strategy between forests and agriculture, including through investment in livestock (e.g. silvopastoral practices) and agroforestry, although off-farm incomes and remittances are now increasingly common in Asia. Furthermore, it is crucial to note that three quarters of the world's freshwater, which is crucial for food production and human survival, are provided through forested catchments (Fischlin et al. 2007).

Developing countries account for nearly 90% of the consumption of fuel wood and charcoal, much of which is often collected by women and children (Lele et al. 2012). Between 65% and 80% of the global population rely on medicines derived from forests as its primary form of health care, according to estimates by the World Health Organization (Lele et al. 2012).

The income generated from all types of forests and trees outside forests for people, countries and global trade is significant. In 2009, the formal forest sector's contribution to global gross domestic product (GDP) (from round wood production, wood processing and pulp and paper) was estimated to be nearly US$ 468 billion, accounting for nearly 1% of global GDP for that year (FAO 2009). In addition to monetary benefits, the value of the non-monetary benefits from forests - including environmental and social services to rural economies and households through the provision of energy, shelter and medicine - is estimated by some researchers to be equivalent to two to three times the estimated contribution to GDP (Agrawal et al. 2013). Yet, unlike other types of land use such as agriculture, many of these intangible benefits of forests are not factored into either public or private statistics.

1.b. State of Forests

In the last few years, deforestation - mainly the conversion of tropical forests to agricultural land - has shown a decreasing trend. This has been due to important measures that have been taken in many countries around the world. For example, countries such as Brazil, Costa Rica, Chile, Rwanda, China and Viet Nam have employed various measures to combat deforestation and to upscale opportunities for sustainable management of forests. In spite of these efforts, deforestation remains alarmingly high in many countries. Worldwide, around 13 million hectares of forest were converted to other uses or lost through natural causes each year in the period 2000-2010, including some of the most biologically diverse habitats on Earth. Afforestation and natural expansion of forests (primarily temperate and boreal forests) have reduced the net loss of forest, which fell from an average of 8.3 million hectares annually in the 1990s to 5.2 million hectares per year between 2000 and 2010. Deforestation not only results in a decrease in biodiversity and clean water, and an increase in soil erosion, land degradation and the release of carbon into the atmosphere; in most cases it also results in the loss of a major economic asset and livelihood opportunities. For example, approximately 60 million indigenous peoples are almost wholly dependent on forests (IBRD/World Bank 2004),. As such, deforestation exacerbates poverty, especially among the more vulnerable stakeholders including rural communities, indigenous peoples and women in developing countries.

The interconnectedness of forests with other sectors has been long recognized. The causes of deforestation and forest degradation are multiple, complex and often geographically specific, but some general trends have been identified over the past decade (Kissinger et al. 2012). At the global level, the most immediate and proximate cause is the expansion of large-scale, commercialised agriculture and rapid urbanization. Commercial timber extraction, livestock production and agriculture, as well as charcoal production are among the main drivers of forest degradation in various regions. Climate change could also impact the growth and productivity of forests, both directly, due to changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide and climate, and indirectly, by altering the frequency and severity of forest disturbances like fires, droughts and development. These could result in major shifts in forest ecosystems, including in terms of species composition, health and overall resilience. Forests have also suffered due to corruption and illegal logging, and other illegal practices in the sector (World Bank 2006).

Ensuring the provision of forests services and products has led to the development of the concept of sustainable forest management (SFM). SFM is "a dynamic and evolving concept [that] aims to maintain and enhance the economic, social and environmental values of all types of forests, for the benefit of present and future generations" (UNFF 2007). SFM has further been operationalized with a wide range of criteria and indicators, based on its widely accepted seven thematic elements: (a) extent of forest resources; (b) forest biological diversity; (c) forest health and vitality; (d) productive functions of forest resources; (e) protective functions of forest resources; (f) socio-economic functions of forests; and (g) legal, policy and institutional framework. With its multiple facets ranging from conservation to sustainable use and restoration, SFM is now widely regarded as one of the most effective tools to combat deforestation and forest degradation and their underlying causes within and outside the forest sector. There are many approaches that promote SFM. One of these approaches is "forest landscape restoration" which promotes the management of forests and trees outside forests in broader, integrated multi-use landscapes, reinforcing synergies between forests and other land uses such as agriculture.

Forests are also a key component for creating a green economy. In turn, a green economy will also promote sustainable forest management. The green economy concept, as agreed during the Rio+20 Conference, is considered a major tool for achieving sustainable development and eradicating poverty.

Another effective means to advance SFM is through Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (REDD+). REDD+ offers incentives for developing countries to reduce emissions, benefiting from carbon potential of forests, and invest in low-carbon paths to sustainable development.

1.c. Existing Forest and Forest-Related Agreed Goals, Targets, Criteria and Indicators (C&Is) in

Environmental, Economic and Social Aspects

In order to catalyse actions to protect and sustainably manage forests, a wide range of goals, targets and related processes have been agreed upon, along with sets of criteria and indicators (C&I). While this list includes multiple goals, targets and C&Is that are synergetic and in some cases overlapping, they do not necessarily cover all important aspects and issues that relate to forests, people and development. Silos and gaps persist in these areas and further efforts should be made, including as part of consultations on the sustainable development goals (SDGs):

1. Millennium Development Goal number 7 (2000-2015) focuses on ensuring environmental sustainability, with Target 7B to reduce biodiversity loss, achieving, by 2010, a significant reduction in the rate of loss. The Goal included a set of indicators, among them, on the proportion of land area covered by forest (7.1); total water resources used (7.5) terrestrial and marine areas protected (7.6); and species threatened with extinction (7.7). The significance of forests under this goal and related targets, however, is restricted to their environmental contributions, and their crucial social and economic contributions are neglected. It is, however, important to note that while forests are only mentioned in MDG7, they contribute substantively to reaching all MDGs directly or indirectly.

2. The non-legally binding instrument on all types of forests (NLBI) agreed by the United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) and adopted by the UN General Assembly in 2007 is the only global intergovernmentally agreed instrument on all types of forests, and contains actions at all levels to promote SFM. This instrument includes four Global Objectives on Forests to: (i) reverse the loss of forest cover through SFM and increasing efforts to prevent forest degradation; (ii) enhance forest benefits and their contributions to internationally agreed development goals; (iii) increase the area of sustainably managed forests, and (iv) reverse the decline in official development assistance for sustainable forest management.

3. The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity for 2011-2020, and the 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets represent a universally agreed framework for action on biodiversity and a foundation for sustainable development for all stakeholders. The Strategic Plan was adopted by the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), and subsequently recognized by the UN General Assembly and supported by the governing bodies of other biodiversity related conventions. Among the 20 time bound Aichi Targets, the most relevant for global SDG targets include those with quantitative parameters, such as Target 5 (to halve deforestation and the loss of other natural habitats by 2020), Target 11 (to protect 17% of land and 10% of oceans through protected areas by 2020), Target 15 (restore 15% of degraded lands by 2020), as well as Target 7 (sustainably managed areas under agriculture, aquaculture and forestry) and Target 14 (safeguarding essential ecosystems and social equity).

4. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) has provisions for Parties to implement mitigation actions in the land use, land-use change and forestry sector (LULUCF), including: (i) reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, conservation of forest carbon stocks, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries (REDD-plus); (ii) reducing emissions and enhancing removals from LULUCF; and (iii) afforestation and reforestation project activities under the Clean Development Mechanism.

5. The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) adopted a 10-year Strategic Plan for 2008 to 2018 with several forest-related commitments and indicators, notably within Strategic Objectives 2 (improving affected ecosystems) and 3 (generating global benefits); and two specific impact indicators: land cover status and the population proportion in affected areas living above the poverty line, for measuring impact of progress in stopping and reversing land degradation and restoring lands.

6. The Bonn Challenge, established in September 2011 as a vehicle to support the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, calls for the restoration of 150 million ha of deforested and degraded lands globally by 2020.

7. At the regional level, the European Union set up an action plan on Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade (FLEGT) with the goal of preventing illegal timber imports. Other countries - notably USA and Australia - have introduced legislation promoting legality in timber trade.

8. The European Legally Binding Instrument on Forests presently is being negotiated and its conclusion could be a milestone development with impacts on regional and global forest policies.

9. At the global and regional levels, several sets of C&Is for SFM and related processes have been established, notably indicators used in FAO's Global Forest Resources Assessment and the C&Is of the International Tropical Timber Organisation (ITTO), of the Montreal Process, and of Forest Europe (the pan-European policy process which also produced general and operational level guidelines for SFM).

10. A range of private sector and market-based initiatives have been set up, including voluntary codes of conduct and certification schemes such as the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) and the Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC).

II. Overview of proposals

2.a. A specific SDG on forests

There are numerous international initiatives that deal with various aspects of forests. While this proliferation has enriched international and national institutional frameworks on forests, this has also contributed further to the fragmentation of the already highly complex international forest policy portfolio.

A specific SDG on forests would help address this challenge by providing a clear yet highly visible and effective guidance on how to ensure a comprehensive, consistent and balanced approach to forests and their relation to people and sustainable development. A specific SDG on forests could be one way to restore the balance between the limits of the resources to deliver products and services (sustainability) and the need to ensure commensurable upstream flows to enable (restore) forests to answer to the broad social demands. Such an SDG could also capture all the goods and services provided by forests, which would not necessarily be the case if forests were to be subsumed under a broader SDG.

An SDG on forests could also help to promote creation of an enabling environment for and the promotion of environmental sustainability, socio-economic development, good governance and rule of law, poverty eradication, and gender equality, all of which are essential for SFM. Moreover, as forests are the key endogenous economic motor for vast disadvantaged and low populated areas like the Amazon or Congo Basin or the boreal belt, a specific SDG on forests could also allow consideration of the living conditions of people in the most disadvantaged areas.

Such an SDG could benefit from existing and proven reporting mechanisms. Besides the nine international and regional sets of C&Is (see section 1.c above), processes such as the time-tested Global Forest Resources Assessment and National Forest Monitoring and Assessment Programme (FAO) are working to further extend the capacity and the harmonisation of reporting across countries. This would provide for effective monitoring of the SDGs.

2.b. A cross-cutting 'Integrated Landscapes SDG' focusing on land, forests, biodiversity, water and other renewable natural resources

Forests are an integral part of landscapes that provide essential resources for sustainable development, poverty eradication and building shared prosperity. This vision of integrated management of natural resources covers the three dimensions of sustainability and is focused on the well-being of present and future generations. There is also a significant connection between integrated landscape management, conflict resolution, disaster mitigation and social inclusion and empowerment. The forest landscape restoration approach to SFM could be envisaged in this SDG, emphasising the importance of safeguarding our natural resources as the planet's life support system and their role as the foundation of sustainable and economic development.

A cross-cutting SDG would highlight the full value of natural resources and their multiplier effects not only to the environment, but also for economic growth, social development, gender equality and peace and security - thus replacing the "silo" approach of the current MDG7. Under such a goal, various existing targets on terrestrial natural resources set forth in the outcomes of major UN conferences and meetings, such as the Global Objectives on Forests, the Biodiversity targets and the sustainable land management approach of the UNCCD could be aligned and utilized. Inclusion of a specific target on forests with related indicators under such a cross-cutting SDG, along with similar targets on other issues covered under a cross-cutting SDG could further enhance coherence among various interconnected renewable natural resources.

Existing and proposed goals relating to renewable natural resources, such as land, forests, energy, biodiversity and water, as well as targets on poverty reduction, ecosystem restoration and sustainable agriculture, could similarly be aligned or included under such a cross-cutting SDG. The resulting targets and indicators should provide linkages which are mutually supportive, consistent, measurable and complementary in relation to the other proposed SDGs. They should integrate and cover the critical inter-linkages of the three dimensions of sustainable development.

III. The way forward

3.a. The need for an integrated, cross-sectoral, cross-institutional and gender sensitive SFM from local to global levels

Inclusiveness is a key component of SFM. At all levels, relevant institutions, stakeholders and sectors need to participate in forest-related decision-making. Inclusiveness reflects the reality of SFM as an approach deeply connected with a range of issues from related sectors (agriculture, water, land, energy, tourism, etc.) to human rights (including rights of access to resources and land tenure) and economic development (especially as forest goods and services cross-cut several productive sectors including agriculture). In return, forest-related decision-making should be integrated within these sectors' strategies and planning processes .

Inclusive governance and decision-making approaches are crucial, wherein equitable legal, land and forest tenure systems are in place. It is essential that state and non-state institutions dealing with forest policies are professionally capable and adequately resourced. Inclusiveness should also ensure that all stakeholders participate in decision-making processes so the resulting outcomes are fair, equitable and appropriated by all for effective implementation. This is especially valid for the most vulnerable population categories - indigenous peoples, the rural poor, and women and children - that often rely, economically and culturally, more heavily on forests than others. Including these stakeholders, in addition to non-forest sector stakeholders, in decision-making helps promote buy-in and ownership and ensures sustainability of policies and programmes, which in turn continue to play a key role in reducing poverty and contributing to food security.

3.b. Means of Implementation: Finance, technology and capacity-building for forests

Broadening and diversifying the range of revenues for and from forests is critical to SFM. Rising to this challenge demands concerted action on several fronts which include: (i) elevating the profile and significance of SFM and its contribution to pressing global issues; (ii) effectively demonstrating the multiple values and benefits public and private investment in SFM; (iii) creating new revenue streams and innovative finance mechanisms which are available to and benefit women and men equitably; (iv) promoting entrepreneurial skills and technical capacities for better accessing and utilizing all sources of financing; (v) accurately reflecting forest services in decision-making and national accounting systems, and (vi) having reliable and current information on forest resources and land use (inventories).

Due to the magnitude of the problem, it is important to diversify sources of finance for forests and in particular to explore cross-sectoral sources, and to identify the ways and means that other sectors can contribute to implementing SFM. Based on a four-year intersessional work and preparation of various inputs including the findings of the 2012 study on forest financing by the Advisory Group on Finance of the Collaborative Partnership on Forests (CPF), and the Facilitative Process' inputs,

Member States at the 10th Session of the UNFF in April 2013 adopted a key decision on mobilizing financing for forests. The key agreed actions include strengthening policy and legislative frameworks (e.g., by emphasizing the forest sector's role in supporting SDGs), establishing national forest financing strategies, setting up national forest funds, strengthening national capacity and institutions, private financing for forests and data collection, specific measures on improving access to funds (particularly among more vulnerable and marginalized groups, including the poor, indigenous peoples and women), addressing the thematic, geographic and data gaps in forest financing and increasing finance for the implementation of the Non-Legally Binding Instrument on All Types of Forests (NLBI); and inviting the Global Environment Facility to consider the possibility of establishing a specific focal area on forests within its next replenishment of the (GEF). Member States also decided to consider, as an integral element of the overall review of the effectiveness of the international arrangement on forests at the eleventh session of UNFF in May 2015, a full range of financing options and strategies, including the establishment of a voluntary global forest fund, in order to mobilize resources from all sources in support of sustainable forest management for all types of forests and trees outside forests.

Among additional processes, much can also be learned from the CBD Resource Mobilisation Strategy, approved in 2008, which is based on 6 guiding principles (promoting efficiency and effectiveness; building synergies; supporting innovation; strengthening capacity; raising awareness; and taking into account gender and socio-economic perspectives). If designed properly, market-based approaches such as payments for environmental services with robust and participatory governance arrangements could also potentially increase financing for local communities.

More support is needed from other sectors and stakeholders, in particular finance institutions and private sectors to further promote both public and private financing for SFM. This will require reforms leading to the creation of an adequate investment climate, better access to long-term finance, infrastructure and labour force development.

3.c. Enabling conditions and monitoring frameworks

A multi-sectoral enabling environment is essential for effectively mobilising public and private financing for SFM. There are a number of conditions to enable the effective implementation of SFM, including the following:

- Integrated natural resource planning and management at the landscape level as a pre-requisite of broader sustainable development policies for SFM;

- Sound forest inventories, scientific knowledge as well as traditional forest-related knowledge should be recognised as bases for decision-making;

- Concerted efforts, including regional cooperation, are required to ensure forest monitoring and assessment through the integrated use of remote sensing and in-situ observations;

- Criteria and indicators need to be further developed to reflect the inclusion of SFM in broader issues such as natural capital, resource efficiency, procurement, distribution and consumption, mineral resource extraction, enabling conditions and gender perspectives;

- Accountability frameworks ensure transparency, confidence and therefore the effectiveness of rights, responsibilities and financial flows;

- Good governance is a necessary condition for SFM. Efforts to improve governance in forest management over the past decade have been commendable, resulting in significant positive changes which need to be further pursued. In this respect, FAO and the World Bank have set up a framework for assessing and monitoring forest governance;

- Gender-equitable forest tenure and resource rights regimes are crucial pre-conditions for effective policy implementation and law enforcement, which rely on clearly defined rights and responsibilities of different stakeholders;

- Environmental, social and gender safeguards and information systems are necessary to guarantee policy design and implementation within basic principles of social equity, and

- Engaging all stakeholders is essential, including indigenous peoples and forest-dependent communities, as well as the private sector which plays an increasing role in implementing and financing SFM. Participatory processes should include gender-sensitive consultations and ensure long-term engagement.

3.d. SDGs and Forests: the next steps and overall framework

Both above-mentioned options in 2a and 2b for the integration of forests into the SDGs require all environmental, economic and social dimensions of forests and trees outside forests and their contributions to sustainable development to be recognized. It is also crucial for the OWG on the SDG to take into full account the interconnections of forests with other areas such as water, energy, biodiversity, agriculture, land, and food security. Equally, it is just as important to recognize the multiple benefits and inter-relationship of these issues. To this end, the possible SDG or target on forests should be accompanied by a process of setting specific targets and indicators at the national, regional and global levels to facilitate its transformation into concrete actions at all levels. Finally, the implementation of the SDG would be greatly enhanced by identifying and linking environmental, social - including gender - and economic criteria and indicators to measure progress. This would ensure that the SDGs can make a significant contribution to implementing SFM around the world.

References Agrawal, A., Cashore, B., Hardin, R., Shepherd, G. & Benson, C. (2013). Economic Contributions of Forests. Background paper prepared for the United Nations Forum on Forests. Document available at http://www.un.org/esa/forests/pdf/session_documents/unff10/EcoContrForests.pdf (retrieved 15 August 2013).

Buttoud, G., Ajayi, O., Detlefsen, G., Place, F. & Torquebiau, E. (2013). Advancing Agroforestry on the Policy Agenda: A guide for decision-makers. Agroforestry Working Paper no. 1. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 37 pp. Document available at http://www.fao.org/docrep/017/i3182e/i3182e00.pdf (retrieved 27 August 2013). Departamento Nacional de Planeacin (DNP). 2007. Consolidar una Gestin Ambiental que Promueva el Desarrollo Sostenible: Propuesta para Discusin. Visin Colombia II Centenario: 2019. Bogot, Colombia

FAO (2005). Global Forest Resources Assessment 2005. FAO Forestry Paper 147. Document available at http://www.fao.org/gtos/doc/ecvs/t12/ecv-t12-biomass-ref20-fao-forestry-2005.pdf (retrieved 30 August 2013).

FAO (2009). State of the World's Forests. Rome: FAO. Document available at ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/011/i0350e/i0350e.pdf (retrieved 25 September 2013).

FAO (2010). Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010. FAO Forestry Paper 163. Document available at http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i1757e/i1757e.pdf (retrieved 15 August 2013).

FAO (2011). Forests for Improved Nutrition and Food Security. Policy brief available at http://www.fao.org/forestry/83784/en/ (retrieved 12 August 2013).

Fischlin, A., Midgley, G.F., Price, J.T., Leemans, R. Gopal, B., Turley, C., Rounsevell, M.D.A., Dube, O.P., Tarazona, J., & Velichko, A.A. (2007). Ecosystems, their properties, goods, and services. In Parry, M.L., Canziani, O.F., Palutikof, J.P., van der Linden, P.J. and Hanson, C.E. (eds), Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 211-272.

Hassan, R., Scholes, R. & Ash, N. (eds) (2005). Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Current State and Trends, Volume 1. Washington, D.C.: Island Press. Document available at http://www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/document.766.aspx.pdf (retrieved 15 August 2013).

The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development & the World Bank (2004). Sustaining Forests: A Development Strategy.

IEA (2000). World Energy Outlook 2000. Paris: International Energy Agency, 57 pp. Document available at http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2008-1994/weo2000.pdf (retrieved 27 August 2013).

Kissinger, G., Herold, M. & de Sy, V. (2012). Drivers of Deforestation and Forest Degradation. A Synthesis Report for REDD+ Policymakers. Vancouver: Lexeme Consulting, 48 pp. Document available at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/65505/6316-drivers-deforestation-report.pdf (retrieved 25 September 2013).

Lele, U., Karsenty, A., Benson, C., Festiveau, J., Agarwal, M. & Goswami, S. (2012). Changing Roles of Forests and their Cross-Sectoral Linkages in the Course of Economic Development. Background paper prepared for the United Nations Forum on Forests. Document available at http://www.un.org/esa/forests/pdf/aheg/aheg2/Forests_and_Cross- %20Sectorial%20Linkages_draft21Dec.pdf (retrieved 15 August 2013). Ministerio do Meio Ambiente do Brasil, 2013. Grupo Permanente de Trabalho Interministerial. Plano de Ao para Preveno e Controle do Desmatamento na Amaznia Legal. 3ra Fase (2012-2015). Propuesta de preparacin (R-PP) para el Fondo Cooperativo para el Carbono de los Bosques (FCPF) por parte de MXICO. Fecha de presentacin: Marzo 2010, Fecha de revisin: Abril 2011.

Sam, T. & Shepherd, G. (2011). Community Forest Management. A Background Paper for UNFF9: "Forests for People, Livelihoods and Poverty Eradication". Document available at http://www.un.org/esa/forests/pdf/publications/CBFM.pdf (retrieved 27 August 2013). Schmithsen, F. (2013). Three hundred years of applied sustainability in forestry. Unasylva 240(64):3-11. Document available at http://www.fao.org/docrep/018/i3364e/i3364e.pdf (retrieved 27 August 2013).

UNECE (2013 a). Forest and Economic Development. A driver for the Green Economy in the ECE Region. Document available at http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/timber/publications/SP-31WebSmall.pdf (retrieved 27 August 2013).

UNECE (2013 b). UNECE/FAO/InnovaWood Seminar on Innovation in the Forest-Based Sector. Document available at http://www.unece.org/forests/wood-innovation2013.html (retrieved 27 August 2013).

UNFF (2007). Non-Legally Binding Instrument on all Types of Forests. Official document A/C.2/62/L.5 available at http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/LTD/N07/557/67/PDF/N0755767.pdf?OpenElement (retrieved 15 August 2013).

World Bank (2006): Strengthening Forest Law Enforcement and Governance: addressing a systematic constraint to sustainable development. Washington. D.C. pp. 77.

Issues Brief 26: BIODIVERSITY

1

I. Stocktaking

The critical role of biodiversity in sustainable development was recognized in the Rio+20 outcome, "The Future we want". While biodiversity will be addressed explicitly at the 8th session of the Open Working Group (OWG) on sustainable development goals (SDGs), it has also been discussed in every session of the OWG to date in relation to many issues critical to development, such as: poverty and hunger eradication; water; food security and nutrition; health; disaster risk reduction; employment; equity and governance.

Why Biodiversity is crucial for Sustainable Development

Biodiversity, the variety of life on Earth, contributes directly to human well-being in many ways, and is also a critical foundation of the Earth's life support system on which the welfare of current and future generations depend.  Biodiversity (i) provides basic goods such as food, fiber, fuel, and medicine; (ii) underpins ecosystem functions and the provision of benefits to people (services), such as water purification and supply, pollination, regulation of pests and diseases, soil nutrient cycling and fertility; (iii) provides ecosystem resilience and contributes to the ability to respond to unpredictable global changes and natural disasters; (iv) includes genetic diversity essential for the adaptation of species and ecosystems to meet current and future challenges; and (v) finally, biodiversity is valued for cultural, spiritual, and religious reasons, and provides opportunities for research and education. Some of these benefits can be realized in the short term but others can take longer periods spanning multiple human generations.

The benefits provided by biodiversity are important to all people. Some benefits of biodiversity are especially important to indigenous peoples, the poor and vulnerable groups. These groups, including the rural poor, are in many cases most directly dependent on biodiversity and ecosystems. To them, the goods and services provided by ecosystems underpinned by biodiversity often constitute social safety nets. Women and men may utilise ecosystem goods and services in different ways. Examples of the benefits of biodiversity include.2

x Almost one billion people in developing countries depend on fish for their primary source of animal protein.3

x As many as 80 per cent of people living in rural areas in developing countries rely on traditional plant-based medicines for basic healthcare.4

x Large populations in South and East Asia are dependent on complex rice-fish agro-ecosystems, where fish and other aquatic animals, serve as a source of nutrition to local communities, and provide essential services for rice productivity in the flooded fields.

x A range of ecosystems act as buffers against natural hazards, providing valuable yet underutilized approaches for climate change adaptation, enhancing natural resilience and reducing the vulnerability of people, for example to floods and the effects of land degradation. These ecosystem

1 The Technical Support Team (TST) is cochaired by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the

United Nations Development Programme. Preparation of the brief has been coled by the CBD Secretariat, FAO, UNEP, UNDP and the World Bank, with contributions from ESCAP, UNFF, UNESCO, UN Women and WMO, and other biodiversity-related conventions (CITES, CMS, ITPGR and Ramsar).

2 Some references to examples provided here and in subsequent paragraphs can be found in the Global

Biodiversity Outlook-3 and The Economics of Ecosystem and Biodiversity (TEEB) report. 3 FAO (2000) The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2000. FAO, Rome, Italy. 4 Bannerman, RB, Buton J and Wen-Chich C (1983). Traditional medicine and health care coverage. World

Health Organization, 9-13.

services improve the sustainability an

d economic efficiency of built infrastructure, and are critical for sustainable and resilient urban areas.

x Access to green space is an important determinant of physical and mental health for many urban dwellers.

Many economic sectors depend on biodiversity and ecosystems services, including water supply, agriculture, fisheries, forestry, health, nutrition, energy, transport and tourism. For example,

x Three-quarters of the top ranking global prescription drugs (on a commercial scale), contain components derived from plant extracts.

x Genetic diversity is central to the seed industry. Its 10 top companies had commercial seed sales of US $15 billion in 2006.

x Insects and other animals that carry pollen between crops, especially fruit and vegetables, are estimated to be worth more than US$200 billion per year to the global food economy.

x The world's fisheries employ approximately 200 million people, provide about 16 per cent of the protein consumed worldwide and have a value estimated at US$80 billion.

x Ecotourism generates significant employment and is now worth around US$100 billion/year.

Ultimately, the loss and degradation of biodiversity impact negatively on all people. However, the impacts are particularly severe, and more immediate on the poor and vulnerable, women, children and indigenous peoples. Biodiversity is threatened by land use change and land degradation, overexploitation, pollution, invasive alien species, climate change and ocean acidification. As biodiversity is lost, ecosystem services are compromised, and, in some cases, there is a risk that some thresholds will be passed, undermining the functioning of the Earth's support system.

The conservation, restoration and sustainable use of biodiversity can provide solutions to a range of societal challenges. For example, protecting ecosystems and ensuring access to ecosystem services by poor and vulnerable groups are an essential part of poverty eradication. Reducing deforestation and forest degradation and enhancing carbon stocks in forests, drylands, rangelands and croplands, is not only a cost effective way to mitigate climate change but it also generates other social and economic benefits. There are major opportunities for many sectors to invest in the restoration of degraded ecosystems. The Working for Water Programme in South Africa, for instance, illustrates how public works programs can achieve a range of conservation and restoration goals, while generating sustainable, inclusive and decent jobs that help to alleviate poverty. Other examples include the Socio Bosques Programme of Ecuador and the Climate, Community and Biodiversity Alliance for the reforestation of degraded lands in India.

Biodiversity is an essential element of Earth's life support system. A truly sustainable development framework must not only acknowledge the role of biodiversity for development, it must also provide the enabling conditions for its conservation and sustainable use, for more equitable sharing of benefits, and for the drivers of biodiversity loss to be reduced. To do this, the post-2015 development agenda needs to promote transformational change in economies and societies.

Existing Globally Agreed Goals and Targets related to Biodiversity

The Millennium Development Goal (MDG) framework includes the biodiversity target to "reduce biodiversity loss, achieving, by 2010, a significant reduction in the rate of loss", 5 under Goal 7 "ensuring environmental sustainability". The target originates from the "2010 biodiversity target". It was adopted, in 2002, by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and also by the World Summit on Sustainable Development, as part of the Johannesburg Plan of

5 http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/environ.shtml

Implementation. Thus biodiversity and environmental sustainability more generally, was included in the MDG framework, but in the implementation of the framework, the importance of biodiversity for the achievement of the other MDGs (including the high-profile goals on poverty, food, and health) has not been sufficiently recognized and promoted. Despite many actions in support of biodiversity, the 2010 biodiversity target was not fully met because the actions were not taken on sufficient scale and because the underlying drivers of loss were not addressed significantly. In the post-2015 UN development agenda, biodiversity needs to be more integrated into broader development objectives.

The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and its twenty Aichi Targets provide an agreed overarching framework for action on biodiversity and a foundation for sustainable development for all stakeholders, including agencies across the UN system. The Strategic Plan was adopted at the 10th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and has been recognized or supported by the governing bodies of other biodiversity-related conventions, including the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals, the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance, the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture and the World Heritage Convention, as well as the UN General Assembly.6 Governments at Rio+20 affirmed the importance of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and achieving the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, emphasizing the role that the Strategic Plan plays for the United Nations system, the international community and civil society worldwide to achieve the world we want. It is primarily implemented by countries through national biodiversity strategies and action plans, with Parties encouraged to set their own national targets within the framework of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets. The UN General Assembly has encouraged Parties and all stakeholders, institutions and organizations concerned to consider the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, in the elaboration of the post-2015 UN development agenda, taking into account the three dimensions of sustainable development7.

The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 includes a vision for 2050, five strategic goals8 and twenty Aichi Biodiversity Targets, mostly to be achieved by 2020. These are measurable, have already been agreed by the international community, and comprise potential elements for future Goals, targets and indicators for the post-2015 UN development agenda. The 2050 Vision stresses the role of biodiversity for human well-being:  "biodiversity to be valued, conserved, restored and wisely used, maintaining ecosystem services, sustaining a healthy Planet and delivering benefits essential for all people". The Strategic Plan also includes means of implementation, monitoring, review and evaluation as well as support mechanisms (strategy for resource mobilization, capacity building, technical and scientific cooperation).

II. Overview of proposals

The importance of biodiversity for sustainable development has featured prominently in the national and international consultation processes for the post-2015 UN development agenda. At the MDG Summit in 2010 and at the Rio+20 Conference in 2012, UN Member States set out the process for preparing for the post-2015 UN development agenda and the new SDGs. Environmental issues have featured strongly throughout this process, including issues related to biodiversity.

6 CMS Resolution 10.18; CITES Resolution 16.4; Ramsar Resolution XI.6; ITPGRFA Resolution 8/2011; WHC

National consultations identified food security and sustainable agriculture, followed by water and sanitation, energy, education and poverty eradication, as priority issues for SDGs. Biodiversity was also explicitly included in the top twenty priorities and sustainable use of natural resource assets as one of twelve proposed SDGs by the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons.

The Sustainable Development Goals will address various aspects of human well-being and be accompanied by targets and indicators. The process for the development of the SDGs is at an early stage, and the outcome of this process cannot be prejudged. However, a number of potential goals have been discussed in the various sessions of the Open Working Group on SDGs. In addition, the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda (HLP), in follow up to the 2015 MDGs and The Leadership Council of the Sustainable Development Solutions Network have made proposals. 9 On the basis of these proposals and for the purposes of considering how biodiversity may be integrated into the SDGs, the following "types" of SDGs may be identified:

x A first type are overarching goals that encompass multiple dimensions of sustainable development such as poverty eradication.

x A second type of goals relates to issues such as food security and nutrition ("nutritious food for all"), "a water secure world", universal clean energy and access to medicines. These are constituents and determinants of human well-being that both directly depend on, and directly impact biodiversity and ecosystems, or have a direct and two-way link to biodiversity.

x A third type of goals may relate to the underlying global "life support systems" such as protection of ecosystems, including land, forests and oceans.

x Finally some goals may relate to less tangible, but no less important aspects, which refer to those "enabling factors" that do not have a "biophysical" relation with biodiversity but impact (both positively and negatively) the utilization and conservation of biodiversity to achieve sustainable development. Examples include education, equality, gender equity, governance, participation and human rights.

These types of goals are closely interrelated as biodiversity intersects in many sectors, and for each goal, the link to biodiversity can be realized at the appropriate level within the SDG process. The HLP report, for example, includes a biodiversity-related target, namely to "adopt sustainable agricultural, ocean, and freshwater fishery practices and rebuild designated fish stocks to sustainable levels" in an indicative goal on "Ensure Food Security and Good Nutrition". The HLP report also suggested an indicative goal - to "Manage Natural Resource Assets Sustainably" with targets to "a) Publish and use economic, social and environmental accounts in all governments and major companies; b) Increase consideration of sustainability in x% of government procurements; c) Safeguard ecosystems, species and genetic diversity; d) Reduce deforestation by x% and increase reforestation by y%; e) Improve soil quality, reduce soil erosion by x tonnes and combat desertification." The report prepared by the Sustainable Development Solutions Network for the UN Secretary General "An Action Agenda for Sustainable Development", includes Goal 9 "Secure ecosystem services and biodiversity, and ensure good management of water and other natural resources." The results of the Global Thematic Consultation on Environmental Sustainability presented in the report "Breaking Down the Silos" also depicts examples of integrated development solutions, drawing on the contributions that the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity and its Aichi Targets can provide. Many of the goals and targets proposed and emerging out of the consultation processes can be aligned and further supported by existing targets and indicators adopted at UN conferences. Suggestions for how to integrate biodiversity into the various types of goals are outlined below.

III. The way forward

The key challenge at the global level is to set goals and targets which can be measured, easily communicated and help guide the transformative actions required by countries, individually and collectively. Four complementary recommendations on how biodiversity could be fully integrated into these Goals are set out below. The 2050 Vision of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity can help shape a shared vision for action towards sustainable development, poverty eradication and universal human development, while the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and associated indicators can provide specific inputs for the SDGs, potential sub-targets and indicators. In addition, the Strategic Plan also contains elements for the means of implementation.

(1) Biodiversity should be integrated into overarching goals addressing broad concepts such as poverty eradication, an inclusive "green economy", human well-being, and sustainable development. This could be achieved by the development and use of comprehensive indicators of progress towards sustainable development, as alternatives to GDP. It is increasingly recognized that GDP (or GNP) is too narrow an indicator of human progress. Broader indicators would focus on wealth (stocks), rather than income (a flow), and account not only for manufactured and financial assets (physical capital), but also natural, human and social capital. In most countries, assessments of natural capital are currently limited to mineral reserves, timber stocks and fish stocks. However, methods are available to also measure the status of ecosystems, taking into account both the extent of healthy ecosystem assets and the extent of their degradation, such as pollution levels. The system for environmental-economic accounting normalized by the UN Statistical Commission and implemented by initiatives such as the World Bank-led Wealth Accounting and Valuation Ecosystem Services (WAVES) partnership can provide integrated measurement frameworks to inform the post-2015 development agenda and SDGs monitoring process. Aichi Biodiversity Target 2 calls for the biodiversity values to be integrated into such national accounting systems, as well as into national and local development and poverty reduction strategies and planning processes. Strategic environmental assessment is a useful approach in this regard. Reform of incentives (Aichi Target 3) is another.

(2) Specific biodiversity related targets and indicators should be integrated into Goals on food security and nutrition, water and health. Such goals - dealing with the physical constituents and determinants of human well-being -directly depend on, and directly impact, biodiversity and ecosystems. Since biodiversity is essential to the continued provision of food and is an important determinant of its quality, targets and indicators under a Goal for food security and nutrition should relate not only to production, but also to its sustainability. This might include for example, targets and/or indicators on genetic diversity in crop systems, pollinators, soil biodiversity (or soil health and carbon content, a proxy that also reflects climate mitigation benefits), as well as indicators of the overall health of agricultural ecosystems such as farmland birds. It could also include targets and indicators on the efficiency of use of water and soil nutrients, particularly where these are underpinned by restoring ecosystem services, on land-use change, land degradation, and better practices for use of pesticides and fertilizer. For fisheries, targets and/or indicators might relate to the status of fish stocks and catch per unit effort. Targets and indicators should also relate to the contribution of biodiversity and dietary diversity to nutritional quality, as well as to access to wild biodiversity-based foods (such as non-timber forest products, bushmeat and fisheries), especially by indigenous peoples, the poor and vulnerable groups. Essential parameters for measuring progress on this type of Goal can draw from a combination of Aichi Biodiversity Targets; for example, on habitat loss (Target 5); fisheries (Target 6); sustainable management of agriculture, aquaculture and forestry (Target 7); limiting pollution (Target 8) managing invasive alien species (Target 9); genetic resources for food and agriculture (Target 13); safeguarding essential ecosystems (Target 14); and restoring degraded ecosystems and addressing climate change (Target 15). On a Goal for "water secure world", biodiversity related targets and/or indicators could address the impacts of water use on biodiversity and the role of biodiversity and ecosystems in underpinning sustainable water supply and its quality. For a "health" Goal, a biodiversity target could focus on the maintenance of diverse natural ecosystems to reduce the burden of vector-borne and parasitic diseases.

(3) Biodiversity should also be included as a central component of goals for global "life support systems" such as goals relating to the protection of ecosystems, including land, forests and oceans, and their natural resources.  The 2050 Vision of the Strategic Plan on Biodiversity could be the entry point for a goal such as "healthy and productive ecosystems", building coherence among other proposals to the Open Working Group on SDGs related to various ecosystems (i.e. land, forests, water, and oceans). This Goal could include targets to ensure that globally or regionally-significant ecosystem tipping points are not breached. Among the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, the following quantitative targets are particularly relevant: by 2020, at least halving deforestation and the loss of other natural habitats (Target 5), protecting at least 17% of land and 10% of oceans through protected areas (Target 11), and restoring at least 15% of degraded lands (Target 15). Target 14, which addresses the contributions from ecosystems to health, livelihoods and well-being is also particularly relevant. Possible indicators could include trends in the provision of ecosystem services, as well as trends in the extent of biomes or ecosystems such as forest and wetlands, trends in the quality of ecosystems such as coral reefs, and the extent of protected areas. Elements from other internationally agreed instruments could also be reflected, such as the non-legally binding instrument on all types of forests and its Global Objectives.

(4) The SDG framework should provide the enabling conditions for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and for the underlying drivers of biodiversity loss to be addressed.

This implies Goals for improved governance, and institutions , at appropriate scales (from local to global), for the management of risks and the negotiation of trade-offs among stakeholder groups, where they exist, as well as for behavioural change, and for building human capabilities through access to education and health care. These goals do not depend directly on biodiversity, nor does their achievement directly involve the utilization of biodiversity. However, the achievement of SDGs of this type is necessary for the achievement of other SDGs. In addition, an understanding of the role of biodiversity and the ecosystems services it underpins may inform these goals and the targets and indicators under them (e.g. the role of biodiversity in food security and income generation for women). Aichi Target 1 on building awareness of the values of biodiversity and the actions needed to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity is relevant to this type of goal.

To develop a coherent post-2015 UN development agenda, each potential SDG should be examined for possible impacts on other dimensions of sustainable development. Does each proposed Goal contribute to sustainable development in a sustained way? Collectively, do the Goals provide for the transformative change needed? Does each proposed Goal enhance, or undermine, the other proposed Goals, including the Goals for "life support systems"? The potential Goals should be revised in light of the answers to these questions and alternative pathways for the achievement of the Goals considered. Specifically it should be considered how targets, sub-targets and/or indicators could be included under each proposed Goal to promote more sustainable pathways, i.e. to ensure that the pathway towards the Goal accentuates the positive impacts on biodiversity and on other Goals, and minimizes the negative impact.

The integration of biodiversity into the SDG framework would be facilitated by improved data, and the identification of suitable metrics, indicators and targets that link biodiversity to the various Goals of the framework. Three improvements are required in this regard: First, greater investment is needed to gather and analyse robust and regular data on the status and trends of ecosystems, associated ecosystem services, and underlying biodiversity. Second, further work is required to develop practical indicators to link biodiversity and the other dimensions of sustainable development (for example for biodiversity-related aspects of food security as explored under recommendation 2, above). Thirdly, to promote mainstreaming, targets and indicators for the integration of natural capital and biodiversity related data in decision-making on policies and investments for sustainable development as called for in Aichi Biodiversity Target 2 could be adopted.

The post-2015 UN development agenda should be applicable at the national level and must include robust and adequate means for implementation, including technical and scientific cooperation among countries, the mobilization of financial resources and support for capacity building. The Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 includes such means for implementation which could provide useful lessons-learned for the post-2015 UN development agenda. Initiatives on the mobilization of resources carried out by other UN entities, and across the Intergovernmental Committee of Experts on Sustainable Development Financing could also provide solid means to generate additional resources for biodiversity.

Issues Brief 27: PROMOTING EQUALITY, INCLUDING SOCIAL EQUITY1

Introduction

Inequalities remain unacceptably high across all main dimensions of human life. Although economic inequalities can be difficult to measure, inequalities in income and wealth are clearly severe and have been widening globally2. As for global wealth concentration, the richest 1% of the world's population now control up to 40% of global assets, while the poorest half owns just one per cent3. Income equality between countries is higher than that within a large majority of countries, such that individual incomes are still largely associated with a person's citizenship and location4. Income inequalities are also significant and growing within many countries and have become especially pronounced in Middle Income Countries and those which have moved out of Low Income status5. They have also increased recently in a number of developed countries6. However, some countries, including several in Latin America, have been able to reduce both economic and non-economic inequalities during the last decade.7

In terms of human development outcomes and related MDG targets, there is a more mixed picture. There are some areas of improvement, such as the gender ratio in primary school enrolment, access to mobile telephony and to treated bed nets. But wide disparities have persisted for many indicators across groups of countries and regions, with LDCs, parts of Africa and countries affected by or emerging from conflicts being furthest behind. Wide and often mutually reinforcing disparities are also evident within countries8, including in terms of: i) rural/urban disparities, as seen in widely differing rates of access to water and sanitation, maternal and child survival rates, access to quality education and reproductive health, child nutrition status; ii) household wealth, with, for example, children in the poorest quintiles twice as likely to die before age five as their counterparts in the richest households, and even more likely to be stunted; iii) gender, for indicators such as years of schooling, secondary and tertiary education, internet access, decent employment, earnings, social protection coverage, time spent on unpaid care work; iv) ethnic minorities and indigenous people; v) migrant status; and vi) disability9. The MDGs, in focusing largely on national averages, without

1 This Issues Brief was co-authored by UNICEF, UN Women, UNDP and OHCHR, with contributions from UNEP,

PBSO, DESA, ESCAP, IFAD, UN-Habitat, IOM, UNESCO, ILO, World Bank, UNAIDS, UNV, WFP, UNFPA, ITU, UNV, DPA, OHRLLS, WTO and other agencies of the TST. It particularly complements the Issues Briefs on Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment, and on Human Rights, including the Right to Development, among others.

2 Isabel Ortiz and Matthew Cummins, 2011. Global Inequality: Beyond the bottom billion - a rapid review of

income distribution in 141 countries. UNICEF New York. Note that a range of further references are available for this paragraph from UN, OECD and academic sources 3 UNRISD, 2013. Inequalities and the Post-2015 Development Agenda. Geneva 4 Branko Milanovic, 2011. The Haves and the Have-Nots, Basic Books, New York 5 UNDP, 2013. Humanity Divided: Confronting Inequality in Developing Countries. New York 6 ILO, 2013, World of Work report, found that income inequalities rose between 2010 and 2011 in 14 of 26

advanced economies surveyed. 7 Nora Lustig, Luis F Lopez-Calva and Eduardo Lopez-Juarez, 2012. Declining Inequality in Latin America in the

2000s. Working Paper, Centre for Global Development 8addressing inequalities explicitly, may have led to perverse outcomes whereby already-marginalized groups have tended to be "left until last", thus exacerbating existing inequalities.

Widespread inequalities are also evident in access to natural resources and in terms of the impact of natural disasters and environmental hazards on different populations. These are often an outcome of unsustainable management of natural resources and/or weakness in public policy (e.g poor urban health and sanitation services), which work to the disadvantage of people who are already disproportionately dependent on the environment for their livelihoods. Imbalances in natural resource access are often worsened by insecurity of land tenure, including lack of recognition of collective tenure for rural communities - including indigenous peoples - and of equal inheritance rights and their practical implementation, especially among women. These are compounded by the impacts of climate instability and extreme weather events, which tend to fall most heavily on those with least resources to cope, including women and girls. And not least, the question of inter-generational equity, and the need for sustainable development to ensure essential resources and a habitable planet for future generations, is also urgent.

I. Stocktaking

The General Assembly in its resolution of 21 December 2012 (A/RES/67/230) expressed its concerns regarding inequality as a challenge for the achievement of the MDGs and that efforts to achieve the internationally agreed development goals often take inadequate account of the impact of inequality on development. It convened an informal thematic debate entitled "The role of United Nations in promoting a new global human order" to address the issue of inequality on 8 July 2013.

Recent discussions on the nature of inequalities, in the global consultations facilitated by the UN Development Group and other analytical work associated with the UN and civil society partners, have seen a high level of consensus around findings that are key to understanding and tackling the challenge of inequalities for sustainable and inclusive development. These are elaborated below.

Inequalities are largely driven and sustained by structural factors - both globally and within individual societies. Globally, these factors include the international drivers of current unequal economic growth, such as: the persistence of barriers that limit opportunities to benefit fully from international trade; weak employment growth in many countries, especially since the 2007 financial crisis; lack of international regulation of corporate and financial activities, including executive compensation and taxation arrangements; volatile commodity prices and weakly regulated markets. At the national level and within societies, driving factors commonly include rapid technological change favouring the highly educated and skilled, the weakening of labour market regulation and institutions (minimum wages, collective bargaining, labour protection and access to training), the reduction in the scope and coverage of social protection systems and floors (child grants, disability allowances, pensions) and increasingly regressive tax systems. Inequalities can also result from serious underinvestment in or policy neglect of certain geographic areas, sectors and population groups. Many inequalities result from discriminatory laws, policies and attitudes, often culturally rooted, that exclude certain groups from equitable participation in community life and from the wider benefits of development. Long-entrenched discrimination and exclusion, as well as violence, insecurity and other denials of human rights, often create or exacerbate existing inequalities. The Global Thematic Consultation on Addressing Inequalities concluded that inequalities cannot be effectively and sustainably reduced unless their underlying causes are tackled10.

Inequalities are multiple-dimensional and intersecting in nature - spanning the economic, social, political, legal, cultural and environmental spheres. Intersecting inequalities reinforce the deprivations faced by specific groups and individuals, and are closely related to marginal status in society - e.g. based on gender, ethnicity, location, age, disability and indigenous identity11. Multiple inequalities are reinforced in turn by dominant ideologies, political and socio-economic marginalization, and, often, group stereotyping and various forms of discrimination and violence. Pervasive examples are the many forms of gender-based violence and the widespread denial to marginalized women and adolescents of access to services for the realization of their sexual and reproductive health and rights. In some cases, young people are also widely excluded from opportunities to fully participate in the social and economic life of their societies, despite an expansion of access to education. Exclusion, discrimination and violence not only have highly negative impacts on the development progress of the people affected and of their societies, but are also contrary to legal obligations under international human rights treaties and intrinsically objectionable on moral grounds, based on common notions of justice and fairness.

Inequalities of opportunity and of outcomes cannot be fully separated: poor outcomes undermine future opportunities. Where outcomes are highly unequal - for example in terms of educational and income status among poor families, women and other caregivers - there is strong evidence that these unequal outcomes are transmitted from parents to children, compromising life-opportunities in the next generation. The circumstances of birth, determined by pre-existing outcomes among adults, have highly significant impacts on the development of peoples' capabilities from the earliest days and years of life, well before they reach school-going age12. These impacts on capabilities - via poor health, stunting, the process of brain development and learning - are often cumulative, irreversible and lifelong13. In addition, learning achievement in schools in many countries often is so poor14 that schooling cannot fully reverse the inequalities of early life nor help to equalize opportunities and capabilities among young people.

Inequalities matter not only for social justice, but also for reducing poverty and for development that is sustainable. Inequalities will need to be systematically addressed if the emerging aspirations of the post-2015 development agenda are to be realized for all. There are several major ways in which inequalities have hindered progress towards MDGs and have crucial implications for the new agenda:

- The persistence of major inequalities makes the eradication of extreme poverty and the full attainment of universal ("zero-based") goals especially challenging. Inequalities, and the barriers associated with them, reduce both the efficiency of economic growth for income-poverty reduction and the efficiency of growth and public spending for improving social service coverage and social outcomes, including for survival, learning and nutrition15. A combination of stronger growth across countries and more equal income and consumption shares within countries is needed, if extreme poverty is to be eradicated16. And reducing inequalities by focusing public investments specifically on socially marginalized, low-income and deprived groups - who are mostly concentrated in rural and remoter areas and also in urban slums - and on countries with special needs, can unlock productive potential and accelerate progress for a range of development outcomes17 18.

11 See Naila Kabeer, 2010, Can the MDGs provide a pathway to social justice? The challenge of intersecting

inequalities. Institute of Development Studies, Univ. of Sussex 12 Save the Children, 2012. Born Equal: how reducing inequality could give our children a better future. London 13 Martin Woodhead, Paul Dornan, Helen Murray, 2012. What Inequality means for children: Evidence from

Young Lives. University of Oxford/Open University, UK 14

- Inequalities in themselves tend to shut people out from opportunities. Inequalities correlate closely with political marginalization, as well as underemployment, and are underpinned by various forms of discrimination and social exclusion. People and groups in such positions often have limited influence on public decision-making; may have weaker ability to access decent work opportunities, credit and information, and public services, such as good schools and health facilities; and may face higher barriers to using recourse and justice mechanisms.

- Inequalities and associated exclusions can also undermine individuals' sense of well being, self-worth and aspiration19 - leading, often particularly among young people, to resignation, poor learning and dropout, mental and psychological health problems and criminalization.

- Inequalities increase the risk of violent conflict. Horizontal inequalities among ethnic or other social groups - whether economic, political, cultural or related to access to justice, public goods or natural resources - can heighten grievances, increasing the risk of instability and violent conflict in diverse settings20. Inequalities are also a main driver of internal and international migration: people forced to leave their home under the pressure of marginalization and discrimination may often resort to irregular migration and become victims of exploitation and abuse.

- Inequalities harm not only the people who themselves are also most deprived, but also their wider societies - by threatening the stability and sustainability of economic growth21; depriving countries of productive human capital and entrepreneurial talent, for example in cases of widespread exclusion of women and girls22, minority groups or persons with disabilities; undermining the ability of people living in extreme poverty to contribute to economic growth and environmental preservation; and reducing social cohesion and mutual trust as a basis for economic, social and political contracts. There is now wide consensus that empirical evidence does not support the idea of an inevitable trade-off between economic growth and equality. If anything, gross inequalities tend to hinder the robustness of growth, as well as its inclusiveness and its sustainability. The policy implications are significant: societies can reduce inequalities and improve the livelihoods of their poorest households while at the same time strengthening the resilience and sustainability of economic growth.

II. Overview of proposals

The existing international commitments on advancing equality for all are extensive. They include the recognition of "the collective responsibility to uphold the principles of human dignity, equality and equity" in the UN Millennium Declaration (2000); the deep concern expressed in GA Resolution 65/1 "Keeping the Promise: united to achieve the Millennium Development Goals" (2010) regarding the challenge of "inequalities between and within countries", which also committed to accelerating progress by "addressing the root causes of the inequalities, disparities and diverse forms of exclusion

18 OHRLLS, 2013, State of the Least Developed Countries 2013, Productive Capacity in the Least Developed Countries and the Post-2015 Development Agenda. New York 19 See Woodhead et al, op.cit 20 Henk-Jan Brinkman, Larry Attree and Sasa Hezir, 2013. Addressing horizontal inequalities as drivers of conflict in the post-2015 development agenda. Mimeo 21 Andrew Berg and Jonathan Ostry, 2011. Inequality and Unsustainable Growth: Two sides of the same coin?

and discrimination affecting children"; and the reaffirmation by the Outcome Document of the UN Conference on Sustainable Development (2012) of "the need to achieve economic stability and sustained economic growth, promotion of social equity and projection of the environment, while enhancing gender equality and women's empowerment, and equal opportunities for all, and the protection, survival and development of children to their full potential ".

These commitments are further underpinned by the set of widely, in most cases almost-universally, ratified UN treaties and conventions which are founded on the human rights standards and principles of universality, indivisibility, equality, non-discrimination, participation and accountability. A clear view emerged during the UNDG-led global consultation on Addressing Inequalities that future responses to inequalities should be guided by human rights. This implies using human rights principles and standards to frame the way in which the post-2015 agenda integrates issues of equality, as well as social equity, as a concept of justice and fairness.

Among recent proposals specific to the post-2015 development agenda, the report of the High Level Panel (HLP) to the Secretary-General (2013), while emphasizing the role of national policy in finding answers to inequalities, proposed a transformative shift in development that would "leave no one behind"; as well as the systematic disaggregation of relevant indicators by multiple characteristics for all goals. It recommended that "targets will only be considered achieved if they are met for all relevant income and social groups".

"We should ensure that no person - regardless of ethnicity, gender, geography, disability, race or other status - is denied universal human rights and basic economic opportunities. We should design goals that focus on reaching excluded groups, for example by making sure we track progress at all levels of income, and by providing social protection to help people build resilience to life's uncertainties." - HLP Executive Summary

The HLP did not explicitly advocate substantive equality, which would require levelling-up measures. However, the Panel did call for the integration of equality of opportunity - and major aspects of its underlying drivers such as non-discrimination, recognizing the differentiated needs of women, men, girls and boys, and the elimination of violence - into all relevant goal and target areas across the dimensions of Sustainable Development. In some areas, universal approaches, using "100%" or "zero-based" targets, would amount to equitable aspirations. The Panel suggested that other targets may be "partial" in nature, where universal attainment by, say, 2035 is not yet considered feasible. Two main concerns have been expressed about this approach: the use of universal targets may still "leave to last" the worst-off groups, with inequalities continuing to rise. Secondly, partial targets can be met at national level without being met for the most deprived groups or areas within a country. The use of additional or intermediate23 targets to reduce inequalities has therefore been proposed to help ensure that no one is left behind and that inequalities are actually being addressed. These could include targets to specify required rates of progress among nationally-identified deprived population groups, and/or targets to specify the extent to which inequalities between groups or locations should be reduced24.

There are divergent views on whether the recommendations of the HLP sufficiently addressed the tackling of inequalities. Recommendations from the global thematic consultation on Addressing Inequalities and a number of other proposals have called for the new Agenda to go further, by between specific disadvantaged groups and the rest of the population. An income-based inequalities target, together with complementary social equity targets - e.g. on access to decent work, wage share of GDP, human development outcomes and elimination of multiple forms of discrimination - could also be included within a broader goal relating to poverty and inequalities. Targets on global income inequalities have also been proposed, such as reducing the global Palma ratio or that each country reaches at least the next World Bank income category by 203028. International inequalities could also be addressed through a strengthened set of targets and indicators for a more equitable global system in relation to trade, investment, debt relief, technology transfer and global governance.

A further way in which inequalities can be tackled is by using monitoring systems, such as dash boards, which incorporate disaggregated targets and specified indicators relevant to deprived groups and areas. These can help ensure a consistent focus on addressing inequalities in policy-setting, programme design and progress reviews, including local and municipal institutions in partnership with civil society. Methods for the practical measurement of inequalities include strengthening current household surveys and vital registration systems with more extensive disaggregation of data and data collection on poorly-covered populations. These could progressively be combined with tracking, performance and progress monitoring using "new data" from, e.g., crowd-sourcing, social audits and citizen report cards, thereby enhancing participation and accountability. An enabling environment ensuring access to information, freedom of expression and the right to association would be essential for inclusive and effective participation in such social accountability mechanisms.

Further attention is needed to methods by which concerns for intergenerational equity can be taken into account by the new Agenda. The Sustainable Energy for All initiative29 is an example of a "universal" approach which addresses both poverty and aspects of sustainability, in the context of natural resource limits. This could be extended to "target mixes" in goal areas such as sustainable water and sanitation for all, food security and nutrition for all30 . Targets directly focussing on environmental preservation or damage reduction would also have positive inter-generational equity effects.

III. The way forward

With growing socio-economic inequalities and the concentration of deprivation in geographic subareas and among identifiable population groups, it is essential that the post-2015 agenda fully address disparities and promote equity-focussed policies and measures that tackle both the manifestations of inequalities and their structural drivers, while focusing both on the people and countries which are furthest from achieving internationally agreed development goals. As discussed

25 For example: Lars Engberg-Pedersen, 2013. Development goals post 2015: Reduce Inequality. Danish Institute for International Studies

26 Options for assessing national income distribution include the Gini coefficient, the Palma ratio (the income share of the top 10% to the bottom 40%), general entropy indices, and Atkinson's inequality measures. 27 See Edward Anderson, op cit.

28 Sustainable Development Solutions Network Leadership Council (2013): An Action Agenda for Sustainable earlier, such policies and measures should be underpinned by human rights standards and principles, including of equality and non-discrimination.

More specifically, inequalities could be addressed in the post-2015 agenda through: 1) Setting tailored targets and disaggregating data in order to address inequalities within all goals, targets and indicators: Disaggregation of data will help measure the gaps between social and economic groups and identify who is being left behind. Setting targets to reduce these gaps (e.g. in health and education outcomes, in incomes and employment) will ensure that the most deprived are not "left until last". This will further help to focus attention on and address direct and indirect discriminations between groups that underpin inequalities. Data should be disaggregated by at a minimum by age, sex, location, ethnicity, income quintiles and disability. Other highly disadvantaged groups could be identified through national specification (e.g. caste, indigenous peoples, migrants, etc.), based on fully consultative processes and taking account of the standards of ratified human rights instruments and treaties31. The disaggregation of data will depend partially on availability but, where data are currently limited, improving data coverage and dissemination may be necessary, as part of a wider "data revolution", to cover important gaps. It will be important that data is disaggregated both for indicators on access (e.g. to health care services, education and employment) and also on outcomes (e.g. child and maternal mortality, stunting, healthy life expectancy) among different groups. Targets should be set in a way that inequalities are progressively reduced and minimum standards raised over the time period of the goals, rather than leaving the reduction of inequalities to the end. This can be done by setting additional or intermediate32 targets to reduce inequalities and raise floors focusing on the rates of progress of identified deprived groups, or on the reduction of specific inequalities33.

2) Integrating a focus on inequality throughout all the goals, targets and indicators. This would mean prioritising inequality in the choice and design of goals, targets and indicators, choosing goals, targets and indicators that directly reflect specific dimensions of income and non-income inequalities (e.g. a poverty Goal could have a more explicit focus on reducing income inequalities and inequalities between groups, e.g. gender-wage and nutrition gaps). Indicators should also enable the monitoring of progress in enabling the full, active and meaningful participation of disadvantaged groups in decision-making and the accountability of decision-makers to them, as measures of the extent to which human rights standards on the quality and inclusiveness of development processes are being met.

3) Incorporating a self-standing goal on reducing inequalities: In addition, it would be useful to include a self-standing goal that focuses on inequality issues. As others have suggested, this could include a focus on global and national income inequalities as well as addressing the elimination of discriminatory laws, policies and social practices. It could also encourage a range of policy and programme options to promote greater equality and social equity - ranging from empowerment of excluded groups to legal reform, resource transfer programmes, land reform and affirmative and anti-discrimination measures in the economic, workplace, educational and political spheres (such as secondary school stipends for girls) - which have shown success in different contexts34.

31 See: UN System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development Agenda, 2013. Statistics and Indicators for the

4) Incorporating monitoring tools that focus attention on addressing inequalities: The MDG Acceleration Framework (MAF) and Monitoring Results for Equity Systems (MoRES) help to identify bottlenecks to including the most disadvantaged groups and actions for eliminating the barriers that exclude them. Such tools support the design of tailored, country-and-context-specific strategies, based on local, disaggregated data and information, and on analysis of trends among deprived populations and of the capacity gaps that need to be addressed for the fulfilment of their rights. The monitoring of exclusion and discrimination by these tools can be carried out with the participation and co-leadership of those who are themselves most affected. In addition, international human rights mechanisms can be engaged in ways that support and provide guidance to the addressing of inequalities and discrimination in the context of national development policies, strategies and budgets.

5) Integrating a focus on addressing inequalities for sustainability: This could include systems and coherent cross-sectoral measures that build resilience against shocks and ensure the protection and rights of specific groups at risk from insecurity, denial of or insecure access to natural resources, disasters, conflict, gender-based and other forms of violence, e.g. through the introduction of legal and institutional mechanisms that empower and build the capacities of marginalized people in decision-making over natural resources; and through measures to ensure transparency, equity and the integration of social and environmental sustainability concerns in policies for the use of land, water and other key assets.

6) Incorporating a focus on inclusive and sustainable economic growth and more equitable global and national economic systems: This could include measures for reducing inequalities on a global as well as inter-country scale, and in terms of national development:

- At the Global level, more equitable international economic systems could imply a strengthened set of targets and indicators that cover measures such as: the abolition of tax havens; stronger regulation of global finance; more needs-based allocation of development finance; improved market access opportunities and trade capacity-building initiatives; job-friendly economic growth strategies; and incentives for innovation, access and diffusion of technologies, including reforms to intellectual property regimes where needed, for example to ensure access to essential medicines. Such targets and indicators should give due attention to countries with special needs and could be integrated into an overall goal on Global Partnerships.

- At the National level, goals, targets and indicators could emphasise inclusive and sustainable economic growth processes that directly address inequality e.g. through macroeconomic and fiscal policies that prioritize real income gains at the "tail end" of the income distribution (e.g. earned-income tax credit; VAT exemptions on basic food and clothing); decent job creation leading to full employment; policies to support fair rewards to labour, including the protection of informal work and ensuring effective compliance with minimum wage, collective bargaining and anti-discrimination legislation; widely accessible infrastructure, including energy and information technology; domestic and care services to support and redistribute unpaid care work; progressive, gender-sensitive land reform programmes and equitable, transparent distribution of productive resources; formal recognition of the multiple values of traditional lands and natural resources for livelihoods and cultures; sustained investment and enabling policies for sectors where poor families are concentrated, such as smallholder agriculture; and the promotion of enterprises owned by and employing women, young people, persons with disabilities, indigenous and disadvantaged minority groups.

7) Stepping up well-focused public investments in people's capabilities which have powerful equalizing as well as poverty-reducing effects, as a central component of sustainable development. These include: early childhood nutritional, income and parent support interventions among low-income families; quality, pupil-oriented, inter-cultural, compulsory and free basic education; access to sexuality education and reproductive health information and services for adolescents and young people; protection of children against all forms of violence and the empowerment of girls and young women; civic engagement mechanisms and pathways to promote the social inclusion of people who are disconnected from community life and to enable them to build societal networks, social capital and self-worth; well-designed, progressively-universal nationally-defined social protection floors and broader systems, including resources transfers that prevent social exclusion and ensure that all people have access to essential goods and services, including affordable and nutritious food; improved water and sanitation, which have major impacts on disease reduction, as well as on labour burden reduction particularly for women and girls; universal-access public health and disease-eradication measures; quality infrastructure in remote, rural and urban slum areas, including roads, mass sanitation and energy; gender-responsive antidiscrimination legislation and policies, including in the labour market; extending banking and credit access to poorer and excluded groups; and investment in skills, knowledge and supporting technologies to meet new challenges in agriculture and other production sectors.

8) Tackling the structural drivers of inequalities, beyond equality of opportunity and access to basic services alone. These underlying drivers - often including legal or social-cultural discrimination, biases in public investments and access to resources, human insecurity and protection failures - will need also to be explicitly addressed in each context. Policies for tackling exclusion, for example through fully-inclusive education, will be key. Levelling-up and protection measures may also be needed, linked to the dismantling of specific forms of socio-cultural discrimination and exclusion, for substantive equality to be achieved.

Finally, it is important to emphasise that at global, as well as national and sub-national levels, the specific ways in which targets are formulated and indicators used for the new Agenda, and the methods adopted for their measurement, including disaggregation by key characteristics, will play a central role in providing incentives to address inequalities. These features will guide investments in data, the focus of policy discussions and progress reviews, and the analysis of interim and final targeted outcomes from an equality and social equity perspective.

At the same time, effective and participatory accountability mechanisms will be needed to underpin the full implementation of measures to promote equality. Increasing peoples' access to information about service delivery performance standards, budget decisions, the use of public funds and corporate business practices, including through the use of information and communication technologies and online services, can empower deprived populations and help address underlying factors of accountability, transparency and participation, with strong impacts for more equitable and inclusive development.

Issues Brief 28: GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT1

I. Stocktaking

Gender inequality is the most pervasive form of inequality around the world and a pressing human rights concern. Recent decades have seen gains in some areas, such as in girls' enrolment in education; however progress has been uneven, with gender inequalities persisting and even growing along several dimensions, such as the gender gap in unemployment since the 2008 crisis. Progress on gender equality is fundamental for realizing human rights for all, creating and sustaining peaceful societies, and building socially inclusive and sustainable development trajectories where the benefits of development are equitably shared. The on-going intergovernmental discussions on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) provide an important opportunity to build on the lessons learnt from the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in order to tackle gender inequality in all its dimensions and realize the full spectrum of women's and girls' rights as set out in international human rights norms and global agreements.2

A snapshot of global progress towards gender equality and remaining challenges Inequalities between women and men, and boys and girls,3 play out across all areas of life in every country, cutting across both public institutions, such as governance systems and markets, and the private sphere, such as families and households. Gender inequalities are reflected in the daily realities of women's and girls' lives including: the disproportionate number of women among those living in poverty;4 women's greater likelihood of living with violence in their homes when compared to men;5 women's and girls' lack of control over their bodies and violations of sexual and reproductive rights;6 inequalities in access to quality education at all levels;7 and inequalities in the enjoyment of social and economic rights including access to decent work and equal pay,8 access to and control over assets,9 and universal social protection coverage over the lifecycle.10

1 This issues brief was prepared by UN Women, UNDP and UNFPA, with contributions from DSPD/DESA, FAO,

IFAD, ITU, OHCHR, PBSO, UNAIDS, UNESCO, UNICEF, World Bank, WFP and WMO. 2 These commitments are enshrined in global international treaties, standards and norms, most notably the

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW); the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR); International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR); and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). Several regional treaties have also recognized the responsibilities of states in realizing the full spectrum of women's and girls' rights. Member States have also made policy commitments such as the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development Programme of Action; the 1995 Beijing Platform for Action (BPfA) and the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20); the Millennium Declaration; 2005 World Summit Outcome; in the resolutions of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council; and in the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW).

3 Although this issue brief is focused on inequalities between women and men, boys and girls, discrimination

based on non-binary gender identities is also rooted in deeply entrenched gender norms and stereotypes. 4 United Nations (2012). The Millennium Development Goals Report: Gender Chart 2012, New York. 5 World Health Organization (2013). Global and regional estimates of violence against women: Prevalence and

health effects of intimate partner violence and non-partner sexual violence, Geneva. 6 Singh, S. and Darroch, J., (2012). Adding It Up: Costs and Benefits of Contraceptive Services-Estimates for

2012, Guttmacher Institute and United Nations Population Fund, New York. 7target of gender parity in all levels of education. Sub-Saharan Africa is the region with the highest rate of girls out of primary school, at 26%.12 Gender gaps in education are particularly stark amongst poorer, rural, indigenous and minority populations. However, girls have a slight edge over boys in terms of secondary school enrolments in Latin America and the Caribbean and East Asia and the Pacific.13 Challenges remain in girls' completion of quality education and in achieving gender equality in learning outcomes.

The MDG target to reduce maternal mortality is the most off-track of all targets.14 It is estimated that around 800 women continue to die every day due to childbirth and other pregnancy related complications.15 Adolescent girls are particularly at risk of complications from pregnancy and childbirth, often stemming from forced and early marriages. Many women and girls lack access to basic sexual and reproductive health services, which means that the 222 million women annually who want to prevent or delay childbearing are denied this human right.16 In 2011, women delivered children alone or with inadequate care in 46 million of 135 million live births.17 Women in rural areas are even more disadvantaged in access to services. HIV/AIDS, which is fueled by gender inequalities and violence against women, is the leading cause of death worldwide for women aged 15-49, and also represents a significant obstacle to women's enjoyment of the right to health.18 Globally, women comprise 52% of all people living with HIV in low- and middle-income countries, rising to 57% in Sub-Saharan Africa.19

Stark gender differences are evident in economic opportunities and access to and control over land, natural resources and other productive assets, as well as in vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters.20 Women comprise an average of 43% of the agricultural labour force in developing countries. Yet women farmers, compared to their male counterparts, control less land - a critical resource for agriculture and food security yet left out of the MDGs - and have limited access to inputs, seeds, credits, and extension services.21 Rural women's dependence on and unequal access to natural resources and productive assets, compounded by limited mobility and decision-making power, mean that they are disproportionately affected by climate change.22 While

11 United Nations (2013). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2013, New York. 12 United Nations (2012). The Millennium Development Goals Report: Gender Chart 2012, New York. 13 UNESCO (2012). World Atlas of Gender Equality in Education.

14 Although there has been a decline in the estimated maternal mortality rate by 47% between 1990 and 2010. 15 United Nations (2013). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2013, New York.

16 Singh, S. and Darroch, J., (2012). Adding It Up: Costs and Benefits of Contraceptive Services-Estimates for

2012, Guttmacher Institute and United Nations Population Fund, New York. 17 United Nations (2013). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2013, New York. 18 World Health Organization (2013). "Women's Health: Fact Sheet No. 334," Geneva. 19 UNAIDS (2013). Global report: UNAIDS report on the global AIDS epidemic 2013, Geneva. 20 UNDP (2011). Human Development Report 2011. Sustainability and Equity: A Better Future for All. The

higher female mortality in 141 countries over 22 years from natural disasters and their aftermaths is due to the socially-constructed vulnerability of women. The fewer discriminatory gender norms and roles and the higher women's social and economic status, the smaller the gender-differentiated impacts on life expectancy in natural disasters. Similarly, countries that focus on education for girls and women had fewer losses due to extreme weather events than those countries that do not with equivalent income and weather conditions. 21 FAO (2011). The State of Food and Agriculture 2010-2011: Women in Agriculture, Closing the Gender Gap women's workforce participation rates have increased in the last two decades, gender gaps in pay and in the quality and security of jobs persist. In 2008/2009 women were paid on average 23% less than men.23 In every region of the world, women are more likely than men to have jobs that are characterized by poor pay, insecurity and a lack of basic rights such as occupational health and safety, let alone access to health insurance, unemployment benefits, or a pension. In 2012, more than half of all employed women worldwide were in 'vulnerable employment'; in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, vulnerable employment makes up more than 80% of women's total employment.24

The severe and enduring job losses associated with the recent crises continue to have an impact on women's rights and livelihoods. Data from the International Labour Organization show that the gender gap in unemployment rates widened between 2007 and 2012 with an estimated loss of 13 million jobs for women.25 At the same time and in addition to paid work, the burden of unpaid work

- which has not been monitored by the MDGs - is disproportionately borne by women and poses a significant obstacle to women's ability to access education, training, and decent employment opportunities, or engage in politics.26 For countries where data is available, women spend, on average, roughly twice as much or more time than men on domestic work, including family care, and rural women spend more time than urban women and men in domestic and household work, including time spent obtaining water and fuel, caring for children and the sick, and processing food. This work is intensified in contexts of economic crisis, environmental degradation, natural disasters, and inadequate infrastructure and services (especially water and sanitation).27

The small numbers of women in public decision-making, from national parliaments to local councils, is another manifestation of gender inequality, diminishing their voice, agency and capacity to contribute and govern. Despite some gains for women in terms of representation in national parliaments over the last two decades, globally only around 1 in 5 parliamentarians are women.28 The gaps are much greater on indicators of women's public participation that are not monitored by the MDGs. As of January 2012, only 17% of government ministers were women.29 Only 8 women served as Head of State and 13 served as Head of Government as of June 2013.30 Of the 14 peace negotiations held under UN auspices in 2011, only 4 of the negotiating party delegations included a woman delegate.31 While the data on women's participation as voters is limited, women often experience specific barriers to full and equal civic participation due to the burden of family responsibilities, the lack of identification documents, limited access to information and the fear of political violence during the polling process.32 Women voters are especially vulnerable in fragile and

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani,J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 717-743.

23 United Nations (2012). The Millennium Development Goals Report: Gender Chart 2012, New York. 24 The ILO defines vulnerable employment as the sum of own-account workers and contributing family

workers. ILO (2012). Global employment trends for women, Geneva. 25 Ibid.

26 United Nations General Assembly (2013). Report of the Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human

Rights, A/68/293, 9 August 2013. 27 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2010). The World's Women 2010: Trends and

Statistics, New York; http://www.un.org/womenwatch/feature/ruralwomen/facts-figures.html. 28 United Nations (2013). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2013, New York.

29 Inter-Parliamentary Union (2012). Women in Politics. 30transitional states, being four times as likely as men to be targeted for intimidation in elections. In addition to women's political participation and representation, a strong women's movement is a powerful indicator of women's voice and influence in decision-making. Indeed, the role of women's organizations in building constituencies to advance women's rights is recognized as the most critical factor in the implementation of gender equality policies.34

Violence against women and girls, a pervasive phenomenon impeding women's and girls' empowerment that is missing from the MDGs, has devastating consequences for individuals, communities and societies across all countries. According to a 2013 global review of available data, 35% of women worldwide have experienced either intimate partner violence or non-partner sexual violence.35 Approximately 140 million girls and women worldwide have suffered female genital mutilation.36 Women and girls represent 55% of the estimated 20.9 million victims of forced labour worldwide, and 98% of the estimated 4.5 million forced into sexual exploitation.37 Rape has been a rampant and systematic tactic in conflict. Conservative estimates suggest that 20,000 to 50,000 women were raped during the 1992-1995 war in Bosnia and Herzegovina,38 while approximately 250,000 to 500,000 women and girls were targeted in the 1994 Rwandan genocide.39 Men and boys experience specific forms of violence, for example, as forced child soldiers in situations of armed conflict and as recruits to and victims of gang violence.

Harnessing the synergies between gender equality, women's rights and sustainable development Gender equality has a catalytic effect on the achievement of inclusive and progressive human development, good governance, sustained peace, and harmonious dynamics between environments and human populations - all of which are at the core of discussions on sustainable development and human rights.40 When women have greater voice and participation in public administration, public resources are more likely to be allocated towards investments in human development priorities including child health, nutrition and access to employment.41 Evidence suggests a relationship between women's empowerment and environmental sustainability, showing a negative correlation between the number of women's and environmental NGOs per capita and deforestation in 61 countries between 1990 and 2005, and a causal link between gender inequality and deforestation in over 100 countries between 1990 and 2010.42 Moreover, recent research shows that women's participation in local institutions governing natural resources is critical for sustainable forest and

33 Bardall, G. (2011). Breaking the Mold: Understanding Gender and Electoral Violence, International

Foundation for Electoral Systems. 34 Htun, M. and Weldon. S., (2012). "The Civic Origins of Progressive Policy Change: Combating Violence

Against Women in Global Perspective, 1975-2005."A merican Political Science Review, 106: 548-569. 35 World Health Organization (2013). Global and regional estimates of violence against women: Prevalence and

health effects of intimate partner violence and non-partner sexual violence, Geneva. 36 World Health Organization (2013). "Female Genital Mutilation: Fact Sheet No. 241," Geneva. 37 For the period 2002 - 2011. ILO (2012). ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour. Results and Methodology. 38 Based on reports by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Commission. J. Ward on

behalf of the Reproductive Health Response in Conflict Consortium (2002). "Bosnia and Herzegovina", If Not Now, When?: Addressing Gender-based Violence in Refugee, Internally Displaced, and Post-Conflict Settings, p. 81 (cited in UNIFEM, Facts and Figures on Peace and Security).

39 United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Rwanda (1996). Report on the

situation of human rights in Rwanda, E/CN.4/1996/68, United Nations, New York. 40 For example, UNDP (2012). Powerful Synergies: Gender Equality, Economic Development and Environmental water management. Ensuring women's access to and control over agricultural assets and productive resources is fundamental for achieving food security and sustainable livelihoods, increasing resilience to climate change, and strengthening women's voice in the family and household.44 Furthermore, evidence indicates that economic growth has been more sustainable in terms of longer-term structural transformation in countries with smaller gender gaps in education and employment.45 However, while gender equality can contribute to poverty reduction, economic growth and democratic governance, the reverse does not always hold. Rising incomes, democratic political participation and peace do not necessarily lead to the realization of women's and girls' rights.46 Indeed some patterns of economic growth have been premised on maintaining gender inequality.47 For this reason, the collective responsibility for achieving gender equality, women's rights and women's empowerment requires specific policy action grounded within both the human rights and sustainable development frameworks.48

Building on the lessons from the MDGs As a set of time-bound targets, the MDGs - MDG 3 and 5 in particular - have drawn attention to gender equality issues. However, as evidenced above, progress has been uneven. The lack of progress on the MDGs for women and girls can be attributed to structural problems in the design of the MDGs, compounded by the absence of an MDG implementation plan and insufficient policies to achieve the desired outcomes. MDG target and indicator design was not fully aligned to the broader principles outlined in the Millennium Declaration, leading in some instances to unintended effects or narrow - or statistically expedient - measures of human development. For example, the focus on skilled birth attendance as an indicator for maternal health, while contributing to concrete gains, should not preclude the need for a full range of measures needed to address maternal mortality.49

Similarly, MDG 3, measured by a single target of gender parity in education, is clearly insufficient to achieve the broader goal of gender equality and women's empowerment. As years of experience

43 Agarwal, B. (2010). Gender and Green Governance: The Political Economy of Women's Presence Within and

Beyond Community Forestry, Oxford University Press, Oxford. Ray, I. (2007). 'Women, Water, and Development', Annual Review of Environment and Resources, Vol. 32: 421-449.

44 FAO (2011). The State of Food and Agriculture 2010-2011: Women in Agriculture, Closing the gender gap for

development, Rome. 45 World Bank (2001). Engendering Development: Through Gender Equality in Rights, Resources, and Voice.

New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press; Washington, D.C.: World Bank; World Bank (2011). World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Seguino, S (2000). 'Gender Inequality and Growth: A Cross-Country Analysis', World Development 28(7): 1211-1230; Ray Reese,and Ray Riezman (2012). 'Globalization, Gender and Growth', The Review of Income and Wealth 58(1):107-117.

46 Duflo, E.( 2012). 'Women's Empowerment and Economic Development' Journal of Economic Literature,

50(4), pp. 1051-1079; Kabeer, N. and Natali, L. (2013). 'Gender Equality and Economic Growth: Is there a win-win?' IDS Working Paper no. 417. Sussex, UK; Goetz, A.M., ed. (2009). Governing Women: Women's Political Effectiveness in Contexts of Democratization and Governance Reform. New York. Routledge.

47 Seguino, S (2000). 'Gender Inequality and Growth: A Cross-Country Analysis', World Development 28(7):

1211-1230. 48 Please see note 2. 49 Yamin, A., and Boulanger, V. (2013). 'From Transforming Power to Counting Numbers: The evolution of

sexual and reproductive health and rights in development; and where we want to go from here', and Sen, G. and Mukherjee, A. (2013). 'No Empowerment without Rights, No Rights without Politics: Gender Equality, MDGs and the post 2015 Development Agenda', Working Paper Series, The Power of Numbers: A Critical Review of MDG Targets for Human Development and Human Rights. In addition to the focus on skilled birth attendance, ensuring access to emergency obstetric care, as well as other factors that contribute to maternal morbidity and mortality such as early marriage, lack of physical security, constrained sexual and reproductive choices such as when to have children and how many, and women's weak access to health care systems are all important issues still to be addressed.

have suggested, there are no 'magic bullets' for reaching gender equality and realizing women's rights. As discussed above, achieving transformation in the lives of women and girls will require a multi-dimensional strategy that tackles the structural underpinnings of gender inequality that are located within the family and community, as well as across markets and governance systems more broadly.

The intersection of gender inequalities with other inequalities based on class, race/ethnicity, disability, age, location, marital status, gender identity and sexual orientation, education level and health status, often lead to specific forms of discrimination and disadvantage. For example, girls in the poorest 20 per cent of households have the least chance of getting an education: they are over three times more likely to be out of school than girls in the highest income quintile.50 Women in poor households face higher risks from maternal mortality and morbidity. Rural women fare worse than rural men and urban women and men for every MDG indicator for which data are available.51 By focusing on global and national averages, the MDGs targets have often masked sub-national differences in achievement which has, in turn, diverted policy attention and resources away from the most marginalized groups. Looking ahead to the SDGs, it is critical that the inequalities between different groups of women and girls are specifically addressed and monitored.

These gaps in the MDGs also reflect a wider issue of data availability and quality. The MDG target on gender equality was selected based on the availability of data, rather than an assessment of what dimensions of gender inequality and women's empowerment were most important to monitor. Indeed, the need to monitor the MDGs has driven data collection efforts over the past decade and although this has led to increased availability of data in areas that are covered by MDGs indicators, the many gender equality and women's empowerment issues not included in the MDGs, such as violence against women and unpaid work, have been neglected. Boosting investment in and commitments to improving gender statistics will be critical for monitoring the SDGs.

II. Overview of proposals

Both the Rio + 20 outcome document and the UNTT report, Realizing the Future We Want for All, made clear reference to gender equality and women's empowerment as central to sustainable development,52 which was reiterated in the UNDG's post-2015 thematic and national consultations.53 At the same time, several bodies, agencies and organizations have issued proposals on addressing gender equality and women's rights in the post-2015 sustainable development agenda.54 Two key points emerge from these proposals: the centrality of gender equality for the post-2015 agenda and SDGs and its relevance for all countries.

50 United Nations (2010). Millennium Development Goals Report. New York. 51 http://www.un.org/womenwatch/feature/ruralwomen/facts-figures.html 52 UN Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 27 July 2012. The Future We Want (A/RES/66/288); UN

System Task Team on the Post 2015 UN Development Agenda (2012) "Realizing the Future We Want for All" Report to the Secretary General.

53 www.worldwewant2015.org. 54 The proposals reviewed here include those issued by the High Level Panel of the Eminent Persons (HLPE),

Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), UN Global Compact, United Nations Development Group (UNDG) post 2015 consultations, International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), The Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI) and the Korean Development Institute (KDI), i.e., Bellagio Group Goals, Action Aid, Friedrich Ebert Institute, Center for Women's Global Leadership (CWGL), The Gender and Development Network (GADN), Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN), Women's Environment and Development Organization (WEDO), The African Women's Development and Communication Network (FEMNET), Women in Europe for a Common Future (WECF), Association of Women in Development (AWID) and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).

Many groups, including the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons, have proposed a stand-alone gender equality goal in the future framework to galvanize resources and political will, and to serve as an accountability mechanism to monitor progress and address the remaining gaps in implementation. Several proposals emphasize that any future goal must transform gender relations by tackling the structural underpinnings of gender inequalities. In addition to a stand-alone goal, strong support exists for a twin-track approach, as agreed in the Beijing Platform for Action (BPfA), which would also mainstream gender perspectives across all other goals.

The following priority issues are highlighted across the proposals: Violence against women and girls: Ending violence against women is paramount, with concrete indicators to capture the prevalence of violence against women and girls, women's and girls' access to justice, and the root causes of gender-based violence such as discriminatory social norms and attitudes.55

Voice, decision-making and participation at all levels: Women's voice and participation in both the public and private spheres are key, with indicators needed on political participation at all levels, including participation in decision-making in the household, as well as more active government involvement in ensuring the effective participation of civil society in gender budgetary planning.56

Access to decent work, social protection, control of assets and income, and the redistribution/reduction of unpaid work: Women's economic empowerment is underscored as a crucial issue, including the attainment of education and skills, the ability to generate income, and have a voice in how household income is spent, as well as the elimination of gender-based discrimination in employment, and legal and social discrimination in the acquisition of assets, such as through inheritance. Reducing women's disproportionate burden of unpaid work, and increasing women's access to quality employment and universal social protection are key priorities.

Access to quality education at all levels and life-long learning: Many proposals emphasize closing gender gaps in secondary and tertiary education, while ensuring participation of socially and spatially marginalized groups, and shifting the focus beyond enrolment to the quality of education at all levels, including through the development and use of ICTs, to ensure gender equality in learning outcomes, and safe, supportive learning environments.

Sexual and reproductive health and rights: To achieve universal access to sexual and reproductive health and rights, maternal health must continue to be a core focus, along with the other essential sexual and reproductive health services agreed upon in the ICPD Programme Of Action. Several proposals highlight that women's and girls' control over their own bodies is an internationally recognized human right, and is fundamental for girls and women to enjoy all their human rights. Some women's groups, as well as the UNDG global consultation on health, also urge that governments meet their commitments to provide comprehensive sexuality education for all adolescents and young people.

Other prominent issues in these proposals include the transformation of the standard approaches to macroeconomic policies (including monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policies) so that they can support, rather than undermine, the realization of women's social and economic rights. The MDGs made no reference to macroeconomic policies, and offered little policy guidance. The 2008 crisis, however, is taken as a powerful reminder of how macroeconomic policy action, or inaction, in one part of the world can have harmful effects on the realization of women's and men's rights elsewhere.

III. The way forward

Achieving gender equality is not just an issue for women and girls: it requires the involvement of women and men, girls and boys, and is the responsibility of all stakeholders. Transformative changes in laws, social norms, social institutions, and public policies are required. Gender roles and relations must be transformed, which entails altering dominant notions of masculinity.

A stand-alone goal on gender equality, women's rights and women's empowerment Drawing on the proposals above, the SDGs should encompass both a stand-alone goal on gender equality, women's rights and women's empowerment and ensure the integration of gender specific targets and indicators across all goals. Not addressing gender inequalities - unequal access to education, participation, health, including reproductive and sexual health, land and productive assets, and employment, particularly given women's and girls' heavy unpaid work burden - is costly for societies and undermines all three dimensions of sustainability. The following three priority areas are proposed for the stand-alone goal:

Freedom from violence against women and girls Violence against women and girls is a pernicious form of gender-based discrimination that seriously inhibits women's ability to enjoy rights and freedoms on the basis of equality with men and boys. It is perhaps the most pervasive human rights abuse in the world today.57 Certain groups of women, such as migrant and refugee women, older women, indigenous women and women with disabilities, face multiple forms of discrimination and are often more vulnerable to violence. Moreover, violence against women and girls is an obstacle to accessing education, training, healthcare, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, resources and the labour market. Violence against women and girls often increases at times of crisis and instability, notably during and after periods of upheaval and displacement associated with armed conflict and natural disasters, but also when people are dealing with economic uncertainty and social insecurity. High levels of organized crime in societies may also be associated with increased levels of violence against women or higher rates of femicide. In some situations of armed conflict, violence against women is widespread and systematic.

Equality in human capabilities, access to opportunities and resources58 Structural inequalities and disadvantages in access to resources and opportunities limit women's and girl's capabilities. Critical resources which expand women's capabilities include having access to quality health services, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, quality education at all levels, quality care services for children and those who are ill and frail, as well as nutritious food and social protection measures. Other critical resources include land, assets, credit, natural resources and time, and opportunities for decent work and equal pay to build women's economic and social security.

A gender-sensitive approach to expanding capabilities involves looking beyond constraints that affect both women and men (such as inadequate access to health services) to address constraints

57 United Nations (2012). UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's remarks at the Commemoration of the

International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, SG/SM/14681 OBV/1166 WOM/1931. 58 The capabilities approach, as developed by Amartya Sen, puts emphasis on people's substantive freedoms

and sees development as a process of expanding those freedoms. These substantive freedoms include capacities 'to be and to do' what one has reason to value, such as the freedom to be nourished, educated, and healthy, to freely decide on the number and spacing of children, and so on. Sen, A. (1999). Development As Freedom. Knopf, New York.

that are gender-specific such as obstacles to women's and adolescent girls' sexual and reproductive health and rights. Increased recognition of women's considerable and valuable unpaid work contributions, and institutions and policies to distribute this burden more equally, are also needed to ensure women's equal access to opportunities and resources. Many of these capabilities play a key role in enabling women's resilience to economic volatilities and environmental risks.

Equality in agency, voice and participation across the full range of decision-making arenas Women have the right to equally participate in decision-making, whether in public institutions, in their communities or families. Having a voice and participating in the political processes and decisions that determine their lives are essential aspects of women's and girls' dignity and agency. Supporting women and girls' participation in decision-making will influence public policies and spending patterns to ensure adequate provision of services, to guarantee their physical integrity and reproductive rights, and improve access to education and health care. Voice and participation in household decisions are also critically important and have direct impacts on the wellbeing of women and girls.

Comprehensive integration of gender concerns across all goals In addition to these three areas, gender-specific targets and indicators should be integrated across other goals to ensure meaningful achievement of those goals by addressing the structural causes of gender-based discrimination which is necessary to eradicate poverty, support sustainable resources management, promote transparent and accountable governance, and enable access to high quality education and health care, as well as to sustainable water and energy. The collection, analysis, and use of sex-disaggregated data and gender statistics are necessary in order to design, implement, and report on these targets and indicators.

Making commitments a lived reality for women and girls: policy implementation and accountability

Any future goal or set of targets should be coupled with strategies, and approaches that will promote, protect and fulfil the full spectrum of women's and girls' rights, many of which are found in international human rights frameworks and in policy commitments.59 These include but are not limited to:

x Legal and policy frameworks that are aligned with international human rights norms and standards, eliminate sex- and gender-based discrimination and provide for women's access to justice and their legal empowerment;

x Macroeconomic policies that reduce volatilities in global markets, reduce income inequalities, and generate decent work for all, facilitate resource mobilization for public investments in infrastructure and services, and thereby facilitate the realization of women's economic and social rights;

x Labour market regulation and employment policies that promote decent work for all, prevent discrimination against women, promote equal pay, prohibit sexual harassment and allow the reconciliation of paid work with family/care responsibilities for both women and men;

x Human development policies that ensure universally accessible and affordable health care, including provision for women's specific sexual and reproductive health and rights, accessible quality education and care services, and provision of infrastructure, including ICTs;

x Environmental and climate policies that enable women's active and equitable involvement in governance, decision-making, access and benefit-sharing related to sustainable use of biodiversity and natural resources and climate change mitigation and adaptation;

59 Please see note 2.

x Comprehensive social protection measures that give women and girls (particularly vulnerable or marginalized individuals such as older women, poor, indigenous and minority women and girls, etc.) protection against risks and vulnerabilities across the life cycle;

x Security and justice sector reforms that prevent, respond to and end impunity for violence against women and girls, protect and support victims/survivors, prosecute and punish perpetrators, and provide gender-sensitive remedies;

x Temporary special measures to enable critical numbers of women to hold leadership positions in the public and private sectors, and to support their participation in local, regional, national, and international decision-making fora; and

x Gender mainstreaming as a strategy for ensuring that gender perspectives are integrated in the design, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation of all policies and programmes, so that women and men benefit equally from the outcomes, and that inequalities are not perpetuated.

Effective implementation of measures to achieve this goal requires gender-responsive accountability systems that enable women to hold government and other authorities answerable for their commitments and actions, and to shape public policy, prevent abuses of their rights, or demand redress where abuses occur. Key to making accountability systems work for women is the strength of women's collective action, both within women's rights groups and within broader associations such as trade unions.

Transparent resource allocation, including practices such as gender-responsive budgeting, freedom of information arrangements to facilitate women's review of public decisions and spending patterns, and judicial reviews equipped to handle public interest cases, will be invaluable for effective accountability to women and girls. Renewed efforts to strengthen data collection, analysis, and use towards gender equality and women's empowerment for monitoring purposes - the HLP Report's 'data revolution' - will be indispensable.

Issues Brief 29: CONFLICT PREVENTION, POST-CONFLICT PEACEBUILDING AND THE PROMOTION OF DURABLE PEACE, RULE OF LAW AND GOVERNANCE1

I. Stocktaking

Peace, rule of law and governance are inter-related and critical foundations of sustainable development. At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), Member States reaffirmed "the importance of freedom, peace and security, respect for all human rights, [] the rule of law, gender equality, women's empowerment and the overall commitment to just and democratic societies for development" and reaffirmed that "to achieve our sustainable development goals, we need institutions at all levels that are effective, transparent, accountable and democratic." (A/RES/66/288). The outcome document of the Special Event convened by the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2013, called for a post-2015 development agenda that "promotes peace and security, democratic governance, the rule of law, gender equality and human rights for all."

Peace, rule of law and governance are enablers of sustainable development outcomes in their own right. Various consultations have given these issues high priority in all regions of the world.2 Progress towards achieving the MDGs has been hampered by violence, conflict, a lack of rule of law and weak institutions. These dimensions are interdependent, as one cannot be solved without addressing the others, as recognized by Member States in the Millennium Declaration, and reaffirmed at the 2005 World Summit, the 2010 MDG High-level plenary meeting, the Rio+20 conference and the 2012 High-level meeting on the Rule of Law.

As part of the development agenda, peace, rule of law and governance are about ensuring an inclusive approach and building institutions that ensure violence reduction, safety, participation, accountability, equitable social service delivery and access to justice to all, especially for the poor and vulnerable. Peace, rule of law and governance issues are all inter linked and mutually reinforcing. They affect peoples' daily lives and are relevant to the development agenda. Because of this, the following questions need to be asked: can their children go safely to school? Do young adults have job opportunities? Can people access public services safely and without discrimination? Do police and courts protect people and provide effective service to all (including women and girls)? Do people know about and participate in governance decisions that affect them and their families?

Sustainable development, peace, rule of law and democratic governance are interrelated conceptually, as well as empirically at the national and global levels. Deficits in one country are likely to impact other countries through economic and financial linkages, migration, refugees, humanitarian crises, pollution, communicable diseases, violence and armed conflicts, terrorism, piracy, organized crime or trafficking in humans, drugs, arms or natural resources. Progressive globalization and regional integration increases the likelihood of these cross-border spillovers, which impact all countries alike - high, middle and low income. This was recognized by the Secretary-

1 This brief was prepared by PBSO, RoLU/EOSG and UNDP, and includes inputs and comments from DPA,

DPKO, ESCAP, ILO, ITU, OCHA, OHCHR, UNAIDS, UNDEF, UNEP, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNODC,

General's High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda through the emphasis it placed on the external stressors that can lead to violent conflict, and impact development.

Peaceful Societies

Peace is an enabling condition for sustainable development while violent conflict is one of the greatest obstacles to the achievement of the MDGs. The gap in MDG performance between conflict-affected and other developing countries is large and increasing. By 2015, more than 50 per cent of the world's poor are likely to live in conflict-affected and fragile states and this percentage is projected to increase to 82 per cent by 2025.3 The High-level Panel on the post-2015 agenda recognized "peace and good governance as core elements of wellbeing, not optional extras", as a "universal agenda for all countries" and as one of five transformative shifts that needs to take place in the post-2015 period: "Build peace and effective, open and accountable institutions for all."

Violence is a global phenomenon

x 1.5 billion people live in countries affected by conflict, violence or fragility.4 x Between 500 million and 1.5 billion children experience physical violence annually.5 x 526,000 people die each year because of violence. 90%of these deaths are not related to armed conflict or political violence, but instead are a result of intentional homicide, etc.6 x Violence and insecurity exist in low, medium and high human development countries. Even amongst wealthier countries, 51 (out of 120) report severe homicide levels.

x Violence is the second leading cause of death for young men in developing countries.7 x Violence against women is a major cause of death, injury and poverty worldwide.8 x 35% of women worldwide have experienced intimate partner violence or non-partner sexual violence in their lifetime.9 Women exposed to violence are 1.5 times more likely to acquire HIV.10 x Some 28.8 million people have been displaced due to violence and human rights violations.11

The nature of violent conflicts has changed dramatically in recent decades. Violent conflicts have evolved from inter-state wars to intra-state conflicts and various forms of violence involving non-state actors, such as armed groups, rebels, gangs and organized crime. In the 21st century, violence and insecurity takes many forms, from large and small wars, to inter-communal political violence, gangs, profit-motivated violence, inter-personal and sexual and gender-based violence.

Freedom from fear and violence is a fundamental human right and the essential foundation for building peaceful and prosperous societies. The most visible threat to security is acts of direct

3 Laurence Chandy and Geoffrey Gertz, Poverty in Numbers: The Changing State of Global Poverty from 2005 to 2015. Brookings Institution, 2011; Homi Kharas and Andrew Rogerson, Horizon 2025: Creative destruction in the aid industry. ODI, 2012.

4 World Bank, World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development. Washington DC: World Bank (hereinafter "WDR 2011"), p. 2.

5 UNICEF, Progress for Children: A Report Card on Child Protection. 2009, p.7 6 Geneva Declaration, Global Burden of Armed Violence. Cambridge University Press, 2011. 7 WHO, Global Burden of Disease. 2010.

8 WHO, Global and Regional Estimates of Violence Against Women: Prevalence and Health Effects of Intimate physical violence, including sexual violence. These acts generate physical and psychological harm and create an environment of fear and uncertainty. Many types of violence and crime - including non-violent manifestations - generate insecurity and can undermine service delivery institutions (e.g. law enforcement, health and education). While all crime (including fraud and theft) can affect security and impact development, it is violence and organized crime12 that is of particular concern. In this respect, it is critical to examine actual violence experienced and levels of fear.

The consequences of violence on various dimensions of sustainable development are significant and long-term and occur at the macro and individual levels. Violence causes death, debilitating injuries, disease, distress and displacement, destroys jobs physical and social capital, damages the environment, prevents educational attainment for generations and discourages investment.13 The number of indirect victims of armed violence is often much larger than the number of direct deaths. Violence and abuse exacerbate conflict drivers and can be conflict drivers in and of themselves.

Many countries currently face cycles of repeated violence, displacement, pervasive humanitarian crisis, weak institutions and instability.14 Countries that have experienced conflict in the past have a high chance of undergoing a recurrence. About 40 per cent of countries coming out of violence relapse within 10 years and 90 per cent of countries that had civil wars in the 21st century went through civil wars in the previous 30 years.15

Drivers of violent conflicts and crime are often related to deprivations and grievances linked to development and its broader dimensions. They need to be addressed through approaches that span multiple dimensions of sustainable development. Drivers of conflict can include socioeconomic inequalities; inequitable access to social services and weak social welfare systems; absence of decent work (particularly for young adults); poor natural resources management; injustices; human rights violations and abuses; political exclusion (particularly youth and women); lack of social dialogue mechanisms; harmful social and gender norms and "cultures of violence" that may emerge in the aftermath of conflict and humanitarian crises. Disputes over rural and urban land possession or boundaries, in contexts of limited security of tenure, are often drivers of long-term conflict, representing a major bottleneck for development. They also include lack of knowledge and/or the capacity to address the psychosocial impacts of conflict; lack of transparency and accountability of public institutions; corruption and elite capture of state resources and widespread availability of small arms. Having lost their physical assets and social networks, displaced populations are among the most vulnerable, as are children, and they may be perceived as easy recruitment targets by rebels or criminal enterprises. The impact of violence and instability on children in particular can impede sustainable development for the future. Statistical analysis shows that correlations exist between income levels and violence and between income inequality and violence.16 Lack of access to food and rising food prices can be important drivers of conflict as seen during the 2007/2008 food prices crisis where food riots occurred in many countries.17

12 According to the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC), it can be defined as "a

structured group of three or more persons, existing for a period of time and acting in concert with the aim of committing one or more serious crimes or offences established in accordance with this Convention, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other material benefit." (UNTOC, Annex 1, Article 2).

13 Paul Collier, V.L. Elliot, Hvard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, Nicholas Sambanis and Marta Reynal-Querol, Breaking

the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy, Oxford University Press, 2003, pp. 181-182. 14 WDR 2011, p. 2.

15 Paul Collier, Wars, Guns and Votes, Harper Collins, 2009; and WDR 2011, respectively. 16 Geneva Declaration, Global Burden of Armed Violence, Cambridge University Press, 2011, p. 153. Among the

143 low- and middle-income countries, 46 report high homicide rates, while 17 report very high rates.

Widespread violence means development in reverse

x A country that experienced major violence during the period 1981 - 2005 had a poverty rate on average 21 percentage points higher than a country without violence.18

x Countries affected by severe violence have fallen behind twice as far than stable countries in reducing infant mortality since 1990.19

x People in conflict-affected states are three times more likely to be undernourished.20

x The share of primary-aged out-of-school children in conflict-affected countries increased from 42% in 2008 to 50% in 2011 (28.5 million children).21

x The average cost of civil war is equivalent to more than 30 years of GDP growth for a medium-sized developing country.22

x The global economic impact of containing violence is estimated to be US$9.5 trillion in 2012, or 11% of the Gross World Product.23

x Trade levels after a major episode of violence takes 20 years to recover from.24

x Violent conflicts can devastate ecosystems, release polluting and hazardous substances and lead to environmentally unsustainable exploitation and coping strategies.25

x Conflicts exacerbate and create new vulnerabilities for natural disasters, which erode development gains.

Peace is an important enabling condition for progress toward the MDGs. Preventing conflict and building peace can result in important contributions to sustainable development. The links between conflict prevention, sustainable development and peace have been acknowledged. The Secretary-General's 2001 report on the prevention of armed conflict explicitly noted that conflict prevention and sustainable development are mutually reinforcing activities (A/55/985-S/2001/574 and Corr.1). Member States have recognized the "benefits [of the prevention of armed conflict] for peace and development, in particular by addressing the root causes of armed conflict" (A/RES/57/337) and the role that conflict transformation can play in "creating conditions conducive to lasting peace and sustainable development" (A/RES/65/283).

Building national and local capacities for early warning, conflict analysis and conflict sensitivity, dispute resolution, dialogue and mediation is critical for addressing drivers of conflict. Experience has shown that conflict prevention, management and resolution, as well as peacebuilding efforts, are most effective when channeled through national and local institutions. For example, "infrastructures for peace" are homegrown institutions that create space for dialogue within and amongst communities and can address sources of recurring violence, build social cohesion and help address tensions and grievances. Integrating approaches that support social cohesion in education policies and systems can also bear important dividends for more peaceful societies. Inclusive participation in these processes is essential to ensure the interests of all are taken into consideration to building peaceful societies. Moreover, free, independent and pluralistic media, including local community media, are important for promoting dialogue, peace and reconciliation.26

18 WDR 2011, pp. 4-5. 19 Ibid, p. 63. 20 FAO and WFP, State of Food Insecurity in the World: Addressing Food Insecurity in Protracted Crises. Rome,

2010. 21 UNESCO, Education for All Global Monitoring Report. 2013. 22 WDR 2011, p. 65.

23

Sustained peace can bring rapid gains

x Since the end of its civil war in 1991, Ethiopia tripled access to improved water sources .

x Mozambique quadrupled its primary education completion rates between 1999 and 2008.

x Primary education enrolment increased in Rwanda from 75% in 2001 to 96% in 2008, and the under-5 mortality rate dropped from 208 in 1993 to 60 in 2001.

Rule of Law and Governance

There is international consensus that the rule of law is critical to sustainable development. The 2005 World Summit outcome document stated: "good governance and the rule of law at the national and international levels are essential for [] sustainable development."28 The importance of rule of law was reiterated in the 2010 MDG outcome document29 and the Rio+20 outcome document.30 The Declaration adopted at the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law in September 2012 concluded that "the advancement of the rule of law [] is essential for sustained and inclusive economic growth, sustainable development, the eradication of poverty and hunger and the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms including the right to development, all of which in turn reinforce the rule of law." It stated that "the rule of law and development are strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing" and should therefore "be considered in the post-2015 international development agenda."31

The Istanbul Programme of Action agreed at the Fourth United Nations Conference on Least Developed Countries, in May 2011, to continue efforts to strengthen an effective, fair and stable institutional, legal and regulatory framework in order to enhance the rule of law and ensure stability, security and inclusive development. Commitments by countries on rule of law and governance have also been made in agreements on thematic issues (e.g. in the United Nations Convention against Corruption of 2005, the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States and the Open Government Partnership of 2011) or regionally (e.g. the Inter-American Democratic Charter, adopted by the Organization of American Stated in 2001, African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance of 2007 and the Bali Democracy Forum). The report of the High-level Panel on the post-2015 agenda also noted the importance of developing good governance and institutions that guarantee rule of law and impartial arbitration of disputes. The Report of the Sustainable Development Solutions Network, An Action Agenda for Sustainable Development, cited ten priority challenges and highlighted the rule of law as a means to reduce inequalities, calling for a transformation of governance whereby governments commit to upholding the rule of law.

Globally "an honest and responsive government" has ranked in the top five of people's priorities in the "My World" survey, and improving governance was a strong cross-cutting theme in all the post-2015 thematic consultations.32

Handbook (http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/media_+_elections_an_elections_reporti ng_handbook_en.pdf.

27 MDG data (http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Data/aspx?cr=646). 28 2005 World Summit Outcome (A/60/L.1), paragraphs 119 and 134. 29 Keeping the Promise: United to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals (A/65/L.1), paragraph 11. 30

Rule of Law

The rule of law is a principle of governance whereby "all persons, institutions and entities, public and private, including the State itself, are accountable to just, fair and equitable laws and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law."33 In addition, Member States recognize the establishment of the rule of law and justice as one of the key elements of conflict prevention, conflict resolution and durable peacebuilding34 and the protection of human rights. An estimated 4 billion people, however, live outside the protection of the law35 and those people that live at or below the poverty line face institutional, legal and administrative barriers that limit their ability to participate in society and be productive on equal terms.

Access to effective, fair, responsive and accountable justice systems, including state, and other forms of justice, is essential for addressing the underlying causes of lack of human security, poverty, inequality and marginalization. The provision of justice involves the ability of the state to ensure the peaceful resolution of disputes; the prosecution and punishment of crimes; and the provision of effective remedies for violations of rights. The independence of the judicial system, together with its impartiality and integrity, is an essential prerequisite for upholding the rule of law and ensuring that there is no discrimination in the administration of justice.36 Barriers to accessing justice are still widespread especially for women, children, poor and marginalized groups and people living in communities affected by violence and conflict. The barriers include absence of justice services due to financial constraints and infrastructure gaps or damage; weak effective institutional capacity; the costs associated with accessing justice systems; lack of awareness, legal aid, assistance and information; lack of legal recognition; and absence of confidence in judicial integrity and court procedures which are too lengthy.37 Children face specific barriers in accessing justice which is especially critical to protecting them from violence and exploitation and recruitment into criminal enterprises.38 Poor and marginalized groups are also often penalized through the law by means of criminalization, prosecution and incarceration and excessive regulation and controls (that can include the imposition of heavy fines, unlawful detention of children, disentitlement from social benefits and infringement on individual privacy and autonomy).39

Access to justice can be enhanced by institutional reform that addresses efficiency and integrity and eliminates discrimination and bias. For example, women's participation in the provision of justice and security services promotes inclusive access, especially for children and women. Data from 39 countries show that the presence of female police officers correlates positively with an increase in the number of sexual assault reports. However, women make up only 9 per cent of the police

33 Declaration of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly on Rule of Law at the National and International Levels (A/RES/67/1), paragraph 2.

34 Declaration of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly on Rule of Law at the National and International Levels (A/RES/67/1), paragraph 18.

35 Commission on Legal Empowerment of the Poor, Making the Law Work for Everyone. Volume I, 2008, United Nations, New York, p. 61.

36 Declaration of the High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly on Rule of Law at the National and International Levels (A/RES/67/1), paragraph 13.

37 2012 Report of the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights on barriers to access to justice (A/67/278).

38 Guidance Note of the Secretary-General, United Nations Approach to Justice for Children, New York, force and 27 per cent of judges worldwide.40 Access to justice also requires enabling people to understand their rights and remedies and to have access to services that support them in exercising those rights, including through legal aid and legal awareness and literacy.

Providing effective and accountable security and justice services that underpin the rule of law helps address cycles of violence and bring about peace and sustainable development. The capacity of a state to build and sustain effective justice and security41 institutions is positively related to reduced levels of violence and to the ability of a state to establish a durable peace. Research has shown an association between weak governance and high levels of homicide.42 Rule of law is also key to tackling external drivers of violence and conflict, such as transnational organized crime, trafficking and illicit financial flows that flourish in the absence of functioning justice and security systems and that directly impact sustainable development.43

According to the 2013 Global Corruption Barometer, the judiciary and police are among the institutions most affected by corruption.44 Strengthening the rule of law and democratic governance systems helps combat such corruption and safeguard better development outcomes. Rule of law provides a framework that underlies the social contract between people and government, ensuring that the country's resources are channeled toward shared prosperity, in a peaceful and secure environment.

The rule of law assures transparency, predictability and accountability, which enables support to livelihoods and economic development. It provides for a safe environment to engage in productive activities and for institutions and businesses to establish and flourish; the possibility to enforce contracts; the regulation of labour and the promotion of opportunities for decent employment; the ability to establish and protect small and medium-sized enterprises; the possibility to enforce fair trade rules and promote access to markets by the poor. Legal and constitutional frameworks can foster improved use of a country's resources towards shared benefits for all. The rule of law can also enable states to protect their people against the harmful practices of third parties, including business enterprises, through prevention, investigation, punishment and the provision of effective remedies and redress.45 Weakness in the independence and capacities of justice institutions to uphold and enforce rules and adjudicate disputes can be a significant barrier to investment.

The rule of law allows for better provision of basic public services. Experience with the MDGs has highlighted that establishing just and fair legal frameworks, effective systems for enforcement of rules and procedures and reducing corruption have enabled effective delivery of health, nutritious food, education, child protection and other social services.46 Legal identity is a first step to accessing

40 UN Women, Progress of the World's Women Report, 2011-2012, p. 59. 41 In particular those institutions providing internal security and law enforcement. 42 Geneva Declaration, Global Burden of Armed Violence, Cambridge University Press, 2011, p. 107; UNODC,

Global Study on Homicide: Homicide and Development, 2011, p. 33, based on World Bank Rule of Law Index. Countries with average governance indicators for their income level have a significantly lower risk of the outbreak of civil conflict within the next 5 to 10 years - between 30 to 45% lower. This relationship holds true for countries with high homicides (WDR, p. 10).

43 HLP Report 2013. 44 The 2013 Global Corruption Barometer measures the extent of corruption in a total of 12 institutions.

According to the 2013 results (from most corrupt to less corrupt), the public perception listed: 1) Political parties; 2) Police; 3) Public officials/civil servants; 4) Parliament/Legislature; 5) Judiciary; 6) Business/Private sector; 7) Medical and health services; 8) Education; 9) Media; 10) Military; 11) NGOs, and 12) Religious

Approximately 12 million people remain stateless and without effective citizenship rights.

It is now widely recognized that improved security of tenure for land and property is critical to ensure social and economic progress across rural and urban settings and that the rule of law facilitates the protection of land, property and other resource rights.50 The ability to secure and protect land and property rights is dependent on the ability of the state to provide a functioning legal and governance framework, and to enable its inhabitants and businesses to seek protection under the rule of law. When a full continuum of tenure security is recognized, from informal and customary types of possession and use to full ownership, it creates certainty about what can be done with the land or property and its use, increases economic opportunities and benefits through investment and protects from seizure and other encroachments and enhances the ability to mitigate land and property disputes, which often risk fuelling larger scale conflict.51 This is critical because most developing countries use conventional land administration systems that cover less than 30 per cent of the country, leaving up to 70 per cent of inhabitants looking to informal and/or customary approaches for their tenure security.52 Protection and security of tenure for the rural and urban poor (including, for example, security of housing rights in informal settlements) enhances livelihoods and

47 Commission on Legal Empowerment of the Poor, Making the Law Work for Everyone. Volume I, 2008, United

Nations, New York. Hyun Son and Nanak Kakwani, "Global estimates of pro-poor growth." World Development 36 (6): 1048-1066, 2007.

Conclusion on civil registration by the UNHCR Executive Committee, 30 Sept. to 4 Oct. 2013, Geneva. 48 From the UNICEF Global Databases (based on data from DHS, MICS, other national surveys and civil

registration systems.) Article 8 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child stipulates that "Children have the right to an identity - an official record of who they are. Governments should respect children's right to a name, a nationality and family ties".

49 UNHCR estimates that about 12 million people are stateless in dozens of developed and developing

countries around the world, though the exact numbers are not known (http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c15e.html).

50 Research illustrates that countries with a more equal distribution of assets, such as land, experience faster,

more sustained and inclusive economic growth than those with a highly unequal asset distribution. See IFAD policy on improving access to land and tenure security, 2008; World Bank, Land Policies for Growth and Poverty Reduction, Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2003; Matthew Stephenson, Economic Development and the Quality of Legal Institutions, Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2005. See several academic articles cited herein.

51 OECD DAC Guidelines, "Helping Prevent Violent Conflict", 2001; Scott Leckie and Chris Huggins, "Conflict and

Housing, Land and Property Rights, a Handbook on issues, frameworks and solutions, 2011. See also 2012

Report of the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and on the right to non-discrimination in this context (A/HRC/22/46) and also the Global Land Tool Network (www.gltn.net).

52 It is estimated that about 70 per cent of those living in extreme poverty live in the rural areas of developing

countries, where weak or unprotected tenure rights are pervasive. Almost 200 million of the world's poor do not have sufficient land to provide a decent standard of living. (IFAD Land Tenure Factsheet) In urban settings, informality and insecure tenure are also ubiquitous. It is estimated that 828 million urban dwellers worldwide reside in slums. In the developing world, 33 per cent of the urban population are slum dwellers, living in informal settlements without tenure security and in sub-Saharan Africa that portion even reaches 62 per cent. In Asia, the proportion of urban population living in slums varies from 25 per cent in Western Asia to 35 per cent in South Asia. In Latin America and the Caribbean, slum prevalence is 24 per cent (UN Habitat, State of the World's Cities: Prosperity of Cities, 2012/2013).

Governance Governance is critical for inclusive social and economic development; environmental sustainability; and peace and personal security. These may be conceptually separate, but they are interlinked in influencing the trajectory of sustainable development. Governance is both an end in itself, and a critical pathway to delivering other development goals. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights confirms the individual's "right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen representatives [and] the right of equal access to public service" (Article 21). At the 2005 World Summit, Member States reaffirmed the universality of this principle while underscoring the "freely expressed will of people to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives."

There is now a strong consensus that both markets and states are necessary for sustainable development. Democratic governance is central to balancing the social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development and to transforming national assets into sustainable development outcomes.54 Shifting to sustainable development pathways, poses a series of new governance challenges for developing and developed countries alike, as the world is going through an unprecedented transition. The global balance of power is shifting; extreme poverty has dropped to historic lows; and new technologies are revolutionizing social behavior. Risks are rising as well. Inequalities are widening within countries, violent tensions are making some societies vulnerable to crisis and even collapse and competition is intensifying around natural resources. Meeting these challenges will require working on three dimensions of governance: inclusion, state capacity and accountability. These dimensions need to be developed in parallel to ensure sustainable progress towards the post-2015 development goals.

Inclusion should be at the heart of the development agenda. If growth is to be sustainable, it needs to be inclusive and accompanied by social justice, equality and respect for human rights and the environment. Societies in which groups are systematically excluded from political or economic life increase the risk of violent conflict that might reverse development gains.55 On the other hand, inclusive political and economic systems, where groups and individuals can participate in decision-making and where people have the freedom to invest, innovate and communicate, are economically more dynamic and are better able to sustain growth over longer periods. Economic, social and political marginalization is often interlinked. Similarly, inclusive economic systems need to be sustained by inclusive political systems. Experiences from developed and developing countries show the positive impact of women's political and economic empowerment on development.56

National ownership is central to the process of inclusion. Together with robust and accountable institutions and transparent and inclusive decision-making processes, national ownership constitutes a prerequisite for a legitimate and effective system of governance that is respectful of human rights.

State capacity, at national and sub-national levels, remains essential for national ownership and for the effective steering of the future sustainable development agenda. To allow shifting to

53 IFAD policy on improving access to land and tenure security, 2008, p 5. 54 Report of the SDSN Thematic Group 10 on Good Governance of Extractive and land Resources: Harnessing and private sector accountable for environmental impacts affecting their livelihoods and health. The widespread failure to remove fossil fuel subsidies is an example of the challenges: despite irresistible technical arguments in favour of the removal of these subsidies, it remains the case that for every $1 spent to support renewable energy, another $6 are spent on fossil fuel subsidies.58 A number of countries have incorporated references within their constitutions or established institutions to protect the rights of future generations. The provisions include responsible long-term considerations and conservation of biodiversity.59 Sustainable development will also require significantly improved policy coherence across government to ensure the three dimensions of sustainable development are all addressed. In particular, many governments are faced with reconciling the competing demands of environmental protection and growth. Innovation and collaboration between people and government, for example, to diffuse new fuel efficient technologies, will also become key requirements for governments.60 Strengthening local government's ability to meet the challenges of sustainable development will also be crucial, especially now that 80 per cent of the world's GDP comes from cities, as does 80 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions.

There is also a growing consensus that sustainable development not only requires capable states but also governments that are accountable to their populations.61 Accountability mechanisms include administrative, political, judicial and quasi-judicial as well as social accountability systems to assure the quality of services. A growing body of research and experience demonstrates that corruption, for example, negatively affects development outcomes, and greater accountability can reduce corruption. Every year the developing world loses as much as US$1 trillion in illicit outflows through corruption.62 Assets held by individuals world-wide in offshore banks amount to US$11.5 trillion, representing an estimated US$250 billion of lost tax revenues, annually. A recent study revealed that 76 per cent of women surveyed consider that corruption has prevented their access to public goods and services.63 The 168 state parties to UNCAC show the global consensus on this aspect of accountability. Hence, governments are increasingly recognizing the value of openness and transparency for promoting growth and improving service delivery.

Openness and transparency are also associated with better socio-economic and human development indicators, higher competitiveness in international markets and lower corruption.64 Fiscal transparency in particular is increasingly linked to improved development outcomes, as are freedom of information acts.65 As a result, over 60 states have committed to the principles of the Open Government Partnership, with growing demands to expand these principles to other actors, in

57 Breaking down the silos - integrating environmental sustainability in the post-2015 agenda. Report of the thematic consultation on environmental sustainability in the post-2015 agenda.

58 Shelagh Whitley, "Time to change the game: Fossil fuel subsidies and climate change", ODI, 2013. 59 Secretary-General's Report on Intergenerational solidarity and the needs of future generations, 15 August 2013, A/68/322.

61 UNDP and OHCHR, Global Thematic Consultation on Governance and the Post-2015 Development Framework: Consultation Report, 2013.

62 Dev Kar and Sarah Freitas, Illicit Financial Flows from Development Countries: 2001-2010, Global Financial Integrity report. December 2012.

63particular the private sector, civil society and private foundations. A degree of consensus is emerging around the importance of transparent governance and access to information as cornerstones of inclusive political and economic institutions.

National parliaments and assemblies have played critical roles in many countries in support of the MDGs, and, in light of their law making, budgeting and oversight functions, could play an even greater role in ensuring accountability of governments post-2015. Analysis of cross-country data shows a correlation between the increased number of women representatives in national parliaments and reductions in corruption. Ombudsman offices and national audit agencies could further contribute to sound governance and administrative accountability systems. Citizen engagement at many levels is also being shown to contribute to improved development outcomes. Democratic governance principles and processes favour stronger accountability mechanisms: transparent and responsive institutions, active and representative parliaments as well as vibrant, diverse and independent citizen engagement.

Many surveys around the world have repeatedly shown the widespread embrace of these democratic governance principles.66 In recent years, numerous Member States have made significant strides towards more inclusive politics, transparent and accountable governance, and a more capable state. At the same time, efforts have continued to support a more empowered media and a more informed and engaged civil society.67 Amartya Sen has argued that famines do not occur in democracies, thanks to the constructive role of media in exposing government failures.68

Democratic governance is a set of values and principles that are essential to achieve sustainable development. Democratic governance is expressed differently across countries and there is no "one-size-fits-all" model. In essence, democratic governance allows people to freely choose their leaders and participate in the shared building of their future, beyond voting in elections alone. It entails a comprehensive system that strives to provide fundamental rights and guarantees for full citizen engagement, equity, inclusion and institutional accountability, while also ensuring that people are protected from arbitrary actions by governments and powerful corporations.

Cross-Cutting Issues

Natural Resources At least 40 per cent of internal conflicts over the last 60 years are linked to competing for natural resources. The risk of violent conflict is elevated when the exploitation of natural resources causes environmental damage and loss of livelihoods or when benefits are unequally distributed. These risks may rise as climate change impacts the availability and distribution of natural resources. Poor people rely disproportionately on natural assets and are vulnerable to climate and scarcity risks.69 Women and girls also face specific threats due to their roles in maintaining family welfare, food production and water collection, particularly in humanitarian crises. Sustainably and transparently managed natural resources can be the engine for economic well-being and a platform for peace.70

The extent to which countries succeed in negotiating good resource contracts; consulting and ensuring the participation of local communities; regulating and governing the natural resource

66 See e.g. the World Values Survey and the various regional barometers. 67sector; preventing illegal and illicit exploitation; and using resource revenues for job creation, public services, infrastructure and economic diversification will define their ability to achieve sustainable development.71 Rule of law enables the sustainable use of natural resources by enshrining land, environmental and resource rights in constitutions and legislation; enforcing regulations; bolstering environmental protection frameworks; and defining rules for natural resource exploitation and land governance.72 Justice - including participatory decision-making systems, access to information, grievance mechanisms, judicial and administrative proceedings and protection of vulnerable groups from disproportionate adverse environmental impacts - should be seen as an intrinsic element of sustainability.73

Women's Empowerment and Gender Equality Women's empowerment and gender equality in public, political, economic and social life are strongly associated with good governance, rule of law and peace. Gender equality is an objective in itself. Research shows that where women have access to employment, participate in public decision-making and enjoy equal property and inheritance rights, countries reap the rewards through lower levels of corruption and a lessened propensity to engage in intra and inter-state conflict.74 In 98 economies equal inheritance rights were related to a higher likelihood of women having formal bank accounts and credit.75 Gender equality in the areas of education and employment make a marked contribution to human development and economic growth,76 while women's leadership contributes to inclusive, transparent and democratic governance,77 as well as conflict resolution.78

Women and girls often face particular challenges in accessing legal protection that facilitates their economic and social opportunities. In 21 of the 63 countries with available data, women have unequal inheritance rights. Gender asset gaps may be linked to unequal marital property regimes as well.79 Women also face discriminatory legislation and gender biases in the prosecution of gender-based violence, particularly between intimate partners, because of gender-discriminatory laws and gender-blind procedures for registering cases providing testimony and administering reparations. Gender-based violence is a pervasive and global phenomenon. Access to justice to address these deficits is especially critical for the empowerment of women, yet chronic challenges remain in this domain. 80

71 Ibid. 72 UNDP Issues Brief, Rule of Law and Development, New York, 2013 and UNEP's Governing Council, Decision 27/9: Advancing justice, governance and law for environmental sustainability page 35 (http://www.unep.org/GC/GC27/Docs/Proceedings/K1350945.pdf).

73 As noted in Decision 27/9 adopted at the 27th and first universal session of UNEP's Governing Council in February 2013, paragraph 3

74 Valerie M. Hudson, et al., Sex and World Peace, New York: Columbia University Press, 2012 (see Appendix B for results of correlation analysis).

75 World Bank, Women, Business and the Law,, 2014 (http://wbl.worldbank.org/~/media/FPDKM/WBL/Documents/Reports/2014/Women-Business-and-the-Law-2014-Key-Findings.pdf).

76 N. Kabeer and L. Natali, "Gender Equality and Economic Growth: Is there a win-win?" IDS Working Paper no. 417. Sussex, UK, 2013.

77 Anne Marie Goetz (ed.), Governing Women: Women's Political Effectiveness in Contexts of Democratization and Governance Reform. New York: Routledge, 2009.

78 Valerie M. Hudson, et al., Sex and World Peace. New York: Columbia University Press, 2012. 79 World Bank World Development Report 2012 - http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2012/Resources/7778105-1299699968583/7786210- where women make up 40 per cent of the labour force. Post-conflict recovery efforts, from transitional justice to economic recovery, tend to ignore women's needs. Patterns of discrimination are repeated or exacerbated, and the social, democratic and peace dividends from investing in women and girls' education, health, including reproductive health services, and employment are not realized. The issue of personal security for girls and women is central to women's rights and is a measure of, and a contributor to, gender equality. High levels of violence against women are particularly prevalent in conflict-prone situations, and sexual violence - which is also perpetrated against males - has been recognized as a tactic of warfare.82 Women's participation in conflict prevention and peacebuilding is essential to promote the full enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by women and girls whether in peace or at times of armed conflict.

Inequalities

Various inequalities - economic, political, cultural, gender/age-based, along with those related to security, justice, nationality and social services - hamper sustainable development around the world. For example, political exclusion has led to protests and violence; inequitable access to social services has fuelled violence; and unequal security and justice provision has deepened conflict divides in many countries.83 There is a need to address inequality in terms of inclusion, fairness, responsiveness, access to public space, accountability to all groups and measures to strengthen inter-group relations. Consideration of inequalities and equitable access to public services, as well as inclusive peoples' participation, could be integrated as a concern into goals and targets across the Sustainable Development Goals (health, education, water, poverty, politics, security, justice), as well as through language stressing these issues throughout the framework.

II. Overview of Proposals on Goals and Targets

There are various options for the inclusion of these issues into the post-2015 framework. Peace, rule of law and governance can be included as specific goals, targets and indicators and can be mainstreamed into other goals and targets, including through separate indicators.84

Goals and targets should be universal. The timeframe and steps for reaching targets can be tailored according to specific country contexts, respect space for national policies and be adapted to local needs and settings.

Goals Covering Peace, Rule of Law and Governance

Goals covering peace, rule of law and governance can be based on existing intergovernmental agreements. In the Millennium Declaration, for example, Member States expressed the determination to establish "a just and lasting peace" and acknowledged the right for men and women to live free "from fear of violence, oppression and injustice," which are broad enough to

81 M. Capriole, "Primed for Violence: The Role of Gender Equality in Predicting Internal Conflict," International Studies Quarterly 49 (2), 2005, pp. 161-178.

82 See the "Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict" endorsed by 122 countries at a side-event of the General Assembly (www.unmultimedia.org/.../over-100-countries-pledge-to-act-against-sex). 83 Henk-Jan Brinkman, Larry Attree and Saa Hezir, "Addressing horizontal inequalities as drivers of conflict in encompass the areas of peace, rule of law and governance. Formulations could also be derived from other intergovernmental agreements, such as the declaration adopted at the High-level Meeting on the Rule of Law in September 2012.

Separate goals have been proposed for peace, rule of law and governance by different groups and processes. The report of the High-level Panel on the post-2015 agenda proposed two specific goals:

x Goal 10: Ensure good governance and effective institutions.

x Goal 11: Ensure stable and peaceful societies.

The Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) proposed a goal to "Transform Governance for Sustainable Development," while the "Bellagio Goals" 85 included the following:

x Security for ensuring individual freedom from violence.

x Empowering people so they could realize their civil and political rights.

Targets

The targets proposed below have appeared in various expert reports on the post-2015 framework. These are indicative and not exhaustive and serve to demonstrate the possibilities of how peace, governance and rule of law targets can be framed and incorporated in the post-2015 development agenda. The suggested targets are measurable and indicators have been, or could be, developed as some data has already been collected.86 In light of their cross-cutting nature, some of the targets proposed under peaceful societies, rule of law and governance could be considered for all three issues. Setting targets will require developing local sources of data, including strengthening the capacity of local institutions to collect and analyse data. When defining indicators, it is important to consider what is required to produce valid, accurate and comparable data.87

Targets

Peaceful societies

x Prevent and reduce by X% violent deaths and injuries per 100,000 by year Y.

x Eliminate all forms of violence against children, women and other vulnerable groups by year Y.

x Enhance social cohesion and ensure adequate formal and informal mechanisms are in place to peacefully address tensions and grievances by year Y.

x Reduce by X% inequalities across social groups, amongst regions within countries and between women and men by year Y.

x Reduce external drivers of violence and conflict, including illicit flows of arms, drugs, finance, natural resources and human trafficking by X% by year Y.

85 Nicole Bates-Eamer, Barry Carin, Min Ha Lee and Wonhyuk Lim, with Mukesh Kapila, Post-2015 Development

Agenda: Goals, Targets and Indicators, Centre for International Governance Innovation and the Korea Development Institute, 2012.

86 UNDP, UNICEF, PBSO, Report of the Expert Meeting on an Accountability Framework for Conflict, Violence,

Governance and Disaster and the Post-2015 Development Agenda, 2013 (hereinafter "Glen Cove Expert Meeting 2013"); Glen Cove Expert Meeting 2013; Report on the Expert Meeting on Accounting for Security and Justice in the Post-2015 Development Agenda, Vienna, 24-25 June 2013 (hereinafter "Vienna Expert Meeting

Governance x Reduce bribery and corruption by X% by year Y and ensure that officials can be held accountable. x Increase political participation by X%, including diversity of representation in public decision-making and civic engagement at all levels.88 x Ensure universal freedom of expression, association, peaceful assembly and access to independent media and information. x Guarantee the public's right to information and access to government data, including budgets.89 x Enhance state capacity, transparency and accountability regarding the control of natural resources and the equitable sharing of benefits derived from their exploitation.90

Rule of Law x Provide free and universal legal identity, including universal birth registration, by year Y. x Ensure independence of judiciary and increase the accessibility and responsiveness of justice services by X% by year Y.91 x Improve capacity, professionalism and accountability of security institutions (including police) by X% by year Y. x Increase by X% the share of women and men, communities and businesses with secure rights to land, property and other assets by year Y. x Ensure equal right of women to own and inherit property, sign a contract, register a business and open a bank account, by the year Y.

Mainstreaming

As noted in the report of the High-level Panel on the post-2015 agenda, peace and gender should not be confined to specific goals. Peacebuilding, violence prevention, rule of law, equality and social cohesion must cut across all development goals. These elements address often underlying vulnerabilities and risk factors that contribute to under-development.92 This is a matter of protecting people's rights and protecting development investments through early prevention and mitigation. Mainstreaming may be achieved by strengthening legal frameworks, integrating peacebuilding and conflict management techniques into education curricula, ensuring equitable access to services, including integrating peacebuilding and conflict prevention approaches into education policies and systems and reducing inequalities in outcomes. Peace and rule of law targets could be incorporated across development goals, for example, in health (violent deaths and administrative review rights), gender (violence against women and girls/women's participation in governance or security institutions) or inequalities (equitable delivery of social services and constitutional protections).

Measurement

Recent reports93 reinforced the message that peace, rule of law and governance should, and can, be measured. Basic standard methodologies and data collection methods are available and are being used. Access to timely and better statistics is the basis for understanding the social, economic and political circumstances under which people live, inform decision-makers on priorities, improve

88 HLP Report 2013. 89 Ibid. 90 Glen Cove Expert Meeting 2013. 91 Normative rationale is based on Rule of Law Declaration (A/RES/67/1), paragraphs 11 (accessibility), 12

(effective, equitable delivery, including civil, criminal and administrative justice), 13 (independence,

Development efforts have been hampered by a lack of basic data. As goals get more ambitious, the quality, frequency, disaggregation and availability of relevant statistics must be improved. To accomplish this requires a commitment to developing capacity and changing the way we collect and share data. One of the successes of the MDGs was the effect on statistical capacity. In 2005, no country had two or more comparable estimates of maternal mortality ratios, while in 2013 there were 132.

As information and communication technologies (ICTs) become an integral part of everyday life for many people around the world, they offer new opportunities for the promotion and measurement of peace, rule of law and good governance. They allow for better access to information, citizen participation in monitoring and accountability and for improved methods for experience-based and perception surveys. It is important that this increase in technology and capacity is made available to the benefit of all countries. One of the lessons learned from MDGs is that it is important to ensure that all countries have strong transparency and accountability mechanisms to monitor the delivery of social services and the utilization of government revenues and aid flows to hold government and non-government actors accountable and to ensure they deliver on the agreed goals.

III. Way Forward

Member States have recognized the need for a single universal framework for the post-2015 development agenda.95 Peace, personal security, rule of law and governance are important enablers and important development outcomes in their own right for sustainable development in all countries. The issues of sustainable development, peace, gender equality, security, rule of law and governance are strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing. Violence, insecurity, a lack of rule of law and poor governance have significant negative implications for sustainable development. On the other hand, various aspects of sustainable development also have important implications for peace, rule of law and governance, institutions, whether they pertain to employment, equality, inclusion, natural resource management or corruption.

There are various options for including peace, rule of law and governance into a sustainable development framework. They could be covered under a single stand-alone goal with various targets, under two or three goals, or listed as separate targets under other goals. At a minimum, they should be mainstreamed throughout the development framework.