no title

Disclaimer Disability Action Council Publication Collaboration with Ministry of Social Affairs Veteran and Youth Rehabilitiation Copyright @ Disability Action Council 2014

All rights reserved Printed in Phnom Penh

Develop of NDSP Supported by: Printing Supported by: Reproduction of material in this NDSP publication for sale or other commercial purposes, including publicity and advertising, is prohibited without the written permission of the copyright holders. Applications for such permission, with a statement of purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Secretariat General of DAC at <info@dac.org.kh>.

301

thousand

Cambodian

Persons with

Disabilities live in Cambodia

Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia Honorary President of Disability Action Council

The Official Launch of the National Disability Strategic Plan 2014-2018 is to demonstrate the strong political will and commitments of the Royal Government of Cambodia to promote the Survival Rights, Protection Rights, Development Rights and Participation Rights particularly mainstreaming disability into social and global development.

Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia Honorary President of Disability Action Council Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN

Kingdom of Cambodia Nation Religion King

3

Message by Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia and Honorary President of the Disability Action Council supporting the National Disability Strategic Plan 2014-2018

Globally, there are over 1 billion persons with disabilities of which 200 million are faced with difficulty in their livelihood. In the next few years, disability issues will become a growing concern, due to increasing rate of disability as a result of issues of chronic illnesses such as diabetes, cancer, cardio-vascular, stroke, etc. This requires increasing attention by all of us to seek immediate solutions. In Asia and the Pacific in particular there are about 650 million persons with disabilities, equivalent to 15% of the total population who are being excluded or overlooked. Cambodia has gone through a period of warfare and a genocide regime, which has left behind many consequences, including a high number of persons with disabilities. Along with this, Cambodian's also are faced with number of vulnerabilities such as landmine and Explosive Remnants of War (ERW), traffic accidents, work accidents, congenital, old age and others.

Persons with disabilities receive attention and have equal rights as others. Persons with disabilities and children with disabilities have to be included in all development activities and are not to be left behind. There is a need for a change in behaviour and social views towards persons with disabilities, and recognition of their actions and voices will result in promotion of social development. Persons with disabilities and children with disabilities have sufficient capability to overcome constraints on their own; therefore including them across all sectors, based on the principle of equal rights will improve the quality of their life and the lives of their families. As a country, develops the welfare of persons with disabilities, it also improves accordingly.

The Kingdom of Cambodia ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities on 20th December 2012 and it entered into effect on the 19th January 2013. At the same time, it is with pride we see the Kingdom of Cambodia being the first among state members of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) to adopt the Asia and Pacific Decade of Persons with Disabilities 2013-2022, Incheon Strategy "Make the Right Real", launched on 29th May 2013. The strategy is recognized as the first of its kind; a regional agreement for Asia and the Pacific to promote livelihood and the rights of 650 million persons with disabilities in the region. Cambodia has also ratified a number of other conventions including the Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on their Destruction; the Biwako Millennium Framework for Action and Biwako Plus Five. Cambodia has been participating actively with the international community in its effort to address disability related challenges.

The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) has developed the Rectangular Strategy Phase III with the 4th rectangle 3rd side and 4th priority, stating that; "Further implementing the national policy on disability through the Disability Action Council; strengthening the implementation of the Law on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and promoting the enhancement of rights and welfare of the disabled according to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as well as improving the quality and efficiency of the disability fund's services"

The National Disability Strategic Plan (NDSP) 2014-2018 outlines 10 key strategic objectives and focuses on reduction of poverty for persons with disabilities; provision of quality and equal health services as well as physical and mental rehabilitation; provision of access to justice and prevention from discrimination, abuse, mistreatment and exploitation of persons with disabilities; access to education and participation in expressing their voices; access to information and participation in political life and development work; and facilitation for access to physical environment, public transport and facilities, knowledge, information and communication; assurance of gender equality and promotion of capacity for women and children with disabilities; enhancement and expansion of international cooperation.

I understand that the Strategy is a dynamic policy instrument requiring monitoring and evaluation and regular improvement to respond to a future reality. I strongly hope that with this Strategy we will be able to achieve concrete solutions and positive experiences to contribute to more effective national capacity development. This is our goal to move Cambodia forward in its steps towards removing barriers and providing opportunities to persons with disabilities for an inclusive society.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the Disability Action Council (DAC), Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation (MoSVY), relevant ministries and institutions, authorities at all levels, development partners (DPs) and non-government organizations (NGOs) and all persons with disabilities for their contribution to the development of this important Strategy, which will become a historical legacy for persons with disabilities. Implementation of the NDSP 2014-2018 requires a programmatic approach to ensure strategic coordination and prioritization of activities. Aside from the program development building on the underlying causes of disability, there should be motivation for actions that promote and support the enhancement of existing opportunity as well as broaden social advantages and co-benefits.

In this sense I would like to propose that DPs, civil society, NGOs and the private sector place emphasis on participation in effective implementation of disability related activities, particularly the NDSP 2014-2018, for our nation and enhance their attention on the protection and promotion of the rights of persons with disabilities and inclusion of disability in development activities at all levels, towards an inclusive society to "Make the Right Real".

On behalf of the RGC it is my honour and pleasure to officially launch the NDSP 2014-2018; to show the strong political will and commitment of the RGC to promote the survival rights, protection rights, development rights and participation rights; particularly the inclusion of persons with disabilities in national and global development.

I strongly hope that all relevant stakeholders, both government and DPs, will take this Strategic Plan to guide their effective implementation.

Phnom Penh, June 30, 2014 Prime Minister

Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN

Minister of Ministry Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation President of Disability Action Council

H.E Vong Sauth

Kingdom of Cambodia Nation Religion King

3

Acknowledgement Minister of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation President of the Disability Action Council

On behalf of the Disability Action Council (DAC) and Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation (MoSVY), I would like to express my high respect and sincere gratitude to Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia and DACs Honorary President for full support and high attention to the disability sector, particularly the inclusion of the disability sector in the political platform and Rectangular Strategy Phase III of the fifth legislature of the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), that defines concrete priority actions for the benefits of persons with disabilities. Building on this foundation, disability is seen as cross-cutting issues in the development process of the National Disability Strategic Plan (NDSP) 2014-2018. I am very proud to see the NDSP 2014-2018 was developed under leadership and coordination of the DAC. The NDSP 2014-2018 is an outcome and new milestone in the disability sector achieved under the wise leadership of Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia and DACs Honorary President. I would like to express my profound thanks to AusAID, in the Kingdom of Cambodia, for the technical and financial support for the successful development of the NDSP 2014-2018. My thanks and appreciation also goes to Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen from all technical institutions, NGOs, private sector, and development partners (DPs), particularly the persons with disabilities for their good cooperation and involvement in the development of the Strategic Plan.

Cambodia has mechanisms to address challenges facing persons with disabilities and those mechanisms have been thoughtfully implemented to effectively benefit persons with disabilities. Although promotion of opportunities to access disability and development services remains limited and a concern for persons with disabilities, which the RGC has the will and commitment for institutional reform and approach to provide an enabling environment through transfer of technologies, legal reform and financial encouragement towards sustainable development for persons with disabilities.

The report of Cambodia Inter-Censal Population Survey 2013, undertaken by the Ministry of Planning concluded that the number of persons with disabilities in Cambodia were 301,629, equivalent to 2.06% of the total population of 14,676,591. Of these, men are 157,008, equivalent to 52.05%; women are 144,622 equivalent to 47.95%. Children with disabilities, aged between 0 and 14 year of age is 32,056 equivalent to 10.63% of all persons with disabilities. This data informs the identification of concrete actions and successful investment with all persons with disabilities. Disability in Cambodia is a challenge that needs strong attention, as it causes loss to the national budget, impacts on the socioeconomic situation and the livelihood of people. To ensure sustainable development, RGC has been addressing disability carefully through development and implementation of policies, strategies and action plans.

The Strategic Plan was developed following guidelines provided by the Council of Ministers and is consistent with the development cycle and aligns with the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) as well as MoSVY's Strategic Plan. DAC and many technical institutions have provided inputs to the development of the Strategic Plan and have set out 10 strategic objectives to respond to disability at both national and sub-national levels.

To ensure uniformity and ownership by relevant stakeholders, we developed the NDSP 2014-2018 in a strategic framework to address disability through protection, prevention, promotion and development of the physical environment and infrastructure. The Strategic Plan emphasizes institutional capacity development, knowledge, professional skills, initiative to create jobs, a reduction and a gradual move towards elimination of all forms of discrimination and abuse against persons with disabilities and responsibility of institutions in charge of implementation at both national and sub-national levels.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the senior staff and officers of the Secretariat General of DAC, MoSVY, relevant ministries and institutions, DPs and experts, particularly persons with disabilities for their meaningful inputs, support and active participation in the holistic and timely development process of the NDSP 2014-2018.

Phnom Penh, June 23, 2014 Minister of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation President of Disability Action Council

VONG SAUTH

Contents Message by Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN, ........... Acknowledgement ....................................................................................... 1. Introduction .......................................................................................... 1 2. Vision ................................................................................................... 3 3. Mission ................................................................................................. 3 4. Goals and Objectives........................................................................... 3 4.1 Goals .............................................................................................. 3 4.2 Objectives....................................................................................... 4 5. Strategic Frameworks .......................................................................... 4 5.1 Guiding principles .......................................................................... 4 5.2 Strategic analysis ........................................................................... 5 5.3 Strategic Objectives ..................................................................... 10 Strategic Objective 1:......................................................................... 11 Strategic Objective 2:......................................................................... 14 Strategic Objective 3:......................................................................... 16 Strategic Objective 4:......................................................................... 18 Strategic Objective 5:......................................................................... 20 Strategic Objective 6:......................................................................... 22 Strategic Objective 7:......................................................................... 24 Strategic Objective 8:......................................................................... 26 Strategic Objective 9:......................................................................... 29 Strategic Objective 10: ...................................................................... 32 6. Activities ............................................................................................. 33 6.1 Implementation phases of the NDSP 2014-2018........................ 33 6.2 Programming and Development of Action Plans ........................ 36 7. Financial Resources ....................................................................... 37 8. Monitoring and Evaluation .............................................................. 37 8.1 Key principles ............................................................................... 38 8.2 Approach ...................................................................................... 39 8.3 Management and institutional structure for implementation ....... 39 9. Conclusion ......................................................................................... 40 Glossary ................................................................................................... 42

1. INTRODUCTION

1. Under the wise leadership of Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, the disability sector has seen a marked improvement and significant achievements have been made. The status of persons with disabilities in Cambodia has been improved gradually. Policies, the Law and regulations on disability have been put in place fruitfully. National and international communities and persons with disabilities are happy and praise the consideration and attention paid to the welfare of persons with disabilities by Samdech Techo, Prime Minister, relevant ministries, institutions, the Cambodian Red Cross and partner organizations.

2. The five-year NDSP called "National Disability Strategic Plan 2014-2018" was developed following the format provided in notification No. 433 SChN of the Council of Ministers on Development of Policy, Strategic Plan and Action Plan.

3. Development of the NDSP 2014-2018 is a continued implementation of the National Plan of Action for Persons with Disabilities, including Landmine and Explosive Remnants of War (ERW) Survivors 2009-2011, which remained in place through 2013. The NDSP 2014-2018 forms an indispensable basis and backbone to promote enforcement of the Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Decade of Persons with Disabilities in Asia and the Pacific 2013-2022, Incheon Strategy "Make the Right Real", particularly the Rectangular Strategy Phase III of the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) on the disability sector.

4. The Kingdom of Cambodia, on 19th January 2013, became a state party to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and this represents a new opportunity for the disability sector in Cambodia and provides additional encouragement to persons with disabilities. The Kingdom of

Cambodia is a model country in Asia and the Pacific in implementing the Incheon Strategy "Make the Right Real" for persons with disabilities in Asia and the Pacific Decade of Persons with Disabilities 2013-2022.

5. The Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities adopted by the national assembly on 29th May 2009 in its 2nd session in the 4th legislature and was promulgated on 3rd July 2009. The Law represents an encouragement and obligation to all ministries, institutions, private sector, and NGOs to employ and utilize the potential presented by persons with disabilities through inclusion of persons with disabilities in their respective actions and encourages all Development Partners (DPs) to include persons with disabilities in their development projects aimed at integrating persons with disabilities in the national and international community.

6. The RGC's Rectangular Strategy Phase III, in its 4threctangle, 3rd side and 4th priority area, states that; "Further implementing the national policy on disability through the Disability Action Council; strengthening the implementation of the Law on the Protection and Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and promoting the enhancement of rights and welfare of the disabled according to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as well as improving the quality and efficiency of the disability fund's services." 7. The NDSP 2014-2018 sets out priority policies for implementation of reform programs in the disability sector with the aim to promote institutional capacity and strengthen social and economic infrastructure, for creation of job opportunities for persons with disabilities, poverty reduction and development of essential works in the disability sector in Cambodia.

8. To ensure effective dialogues and consultations with DPs and civil society, particularly persons with disabilities, to gather inputs from ministries and institutions, DAC has taken three major steps. In the first step DAC had organized 2 regional consultative workshops, first in the northwest region on 26th November 2013 in Siem Reap and the second workshop was in the southwest region on 28th November 2013 in Sihanouk Ville. The second step involved a national consultative workshop organized on 19th December 2013, in Phnom Penh with the participation of representatives from ministries, institutions, DPs, civil societies and many persons with disabilities. The third step was additional consultative meetings on the final draft of the Strategic Plan with representatives from ministries, institutions, DPs and civil society.

9. To implement the obligations mandated by RGC to DAC on development of the national disability strategies and action plans through Sub-decree No. 216 ANKr.BK dated on 2nd May, 2013 DAC has developed the NDSP 2014-2018.

2. Vision

Persons with disabilities and their families have a high quality of life and participate actively, fully and equally in a society in which their rights and dignity are respected with the inclusion of disability across all sectors.

3. Mission

Promote participation of government institutions, private sector, civil society and DPs for disability inclusive social affairs to support sustainable development.

4. Goals and Objectives

4.1 Goals  Improve the livelihood of persons with disabilities and their families, respect inherent dignity and independent living including comprehensive welfare; and

 Promote equality before the Law and access to justice, freedom from torture, abuse, exploitation, violence and to provide solutions in emergency situations as well as equality for women and children with all forms of disabilities.

4.2 Objectives  Provide social protection, education, vocational training, employment, job placement and other services to persons with disabilities;  Empower through participation in decision making and political life of persons with disabilities in the society; and  Improve access to the physical environment, public transport and facilities, knowledge, information and communication.

5. Strategic Frameworks

Cambodia has gone through a period of warfare and a genocide regime which has left behind many consequences, including a high number of persons with disabilities. Along with this, Cambodians are also facing a number of vulnerabilities such as landmine and Explosive Remnants of War (ERW), traffic accidents, work accidents, congenital, old age and others.

Persons with disabilities and children with disabilities are included in all development activities and not left behind, change has been made in behaviour, social views towards persons with disabilities and recognition of their actions and voices will result in promotion of social development. Persons with disabilities and children with disabilities have sufficient capability to overcome constraints on their own, it is therefore their inclusion across all sectors based on the principle of equal rights that will improve the quality of their life and the lives of their families.

5.1 Guiding principles 1. Respect for inherent dignity, individual autonomy including the freedom to make one's own choices, and independence of person; 2. Non-discrimination; 3. Full and effective participation and inclusion in society;

4. Respect for difference and acceptance of persons with disabilities as part of human diversity and humanity; 5. Equality of opportunity; 6. Accessibility; 7. Equality between men and women; 8. Respect for the evolving capacities of children with disabilities and respect for the right of children with disabilities to preserve their identities; 9. Protect the right and freedom of persons with disabilities; 10. Protect interests of the persons with disabilities; 11. Prevent, reduce and eliminate discrimination against persons with disabilities; and

12. Provide physical, mental and vocational rehabilitation to ensure habilitation for full and equal participation of persons with disabilities in society.

5.2 Strategic analysis To meet the goals and priorities of national and international regulations some key documents were analysed. They included:

 Royal Government's political platform for the fifth legislature;  Rectangular Strategy Phase III;  Cambodian Millennium Development Goals;  National Strategic Development Plan, Updated 2009-2013;  National Poverty Reduction Policy;  Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disability;

 Sub-decree on Organization and Functioning of the Disability Action Council;

 Sub-decree on Organization and Functioning of the Persons with Disabilities Foundation;

 Sub-decree on Determining the Rate and Formality of Recruitment of Disabled Persons;

 Sub-decree on Policy support to poor disabled persons in their communities;

 Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;  Incheon Strategy "Make the Right Real";  National Plan of Action for Persons with Disabilities, including Landmine/ERW Survivors 2009-2011; and  UN Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction.

Analysis of Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) of the disability sector in Cambodia was completed through consultation with relevant stakeholders including government institutions, civil society, DPs, private sector, and persons with disabilities. Results from the SWOT analysis, as shown below, were taken into consideration during development of the national strategy.

Strengths  Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with

Disabilities;  Ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;  Adopted the Incheon Strategy "Make the Right Real"  Increased understanding of disability; and  Strong persons with disabilities organizations and Self-Help Groups.

Weaknesses  Dissemination of the Law and regulations relevant to disability issues and rehabilitation is not yet nationwide;  Promotion of implementation of policies, law, national plans and regulations related to disability and rehabilitation remains limited;  Lack of human resources;  Limited financial resources;  Procedures for mainstreaming disability in the national and sub-national development plans remains unclear;  Discrimination against persons with disabilities remains visible;

 Cooperation between civil society, DPs, ministries and institutions in charge of disability remains limited; and  Lack of disability data management systems and updates of disability data is inadequate and not specific.

Opportunities  The Kingdom of Cambodia is committed to protect and promote the rights of persons with disabilities;

 DPs in and outside of the country support government in addressing disability issues;

 The Kingdom of Cambodia has policies, laws, regulations and PRAKAS in place to address disability issues;  Rehabilitation and persons with disabilities development programs are established;

 Persons with Disabilities Foundation and Disability Rights Administration are established;

 Regional and global disability networks; and  Access to advanced information and communication technologies can help service providers as well as persons with disabilities.

Threats  The impact of traffic accidents, landmines, ERW, disasters caused by floods, storms, droughts, non-communicable diseases, and other incidents;  Limited capacity to respond to disability issues;  Poor understanding of disability issues; and  Most persons with disabilities are poorly educated. Institutions Coordinating Disability Affairs

The Disability Action Council (DAC) is the national coordination and advisory mechanism on disability issues. DAC was established under the Law on the

Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities that was promulgated by Royal Kram No. NS/RKM/0709/010 dated 3rd July 2009, with responsibility to develop national strategies and action plans related to disability and has the duty to promote implementation, monitoring and evaluation of implementation of policies, national plans, laws and other regulations related to disability and rehabilitation.

Samdech Akka Moha Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia is the Honorary President of DAC. The Minister of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation is the President, also DAC has 6 Vice Presidents and members from relevant ministries and institutions, organizations, representatives of persons with disabilities who is persons with disabilities, representatives of NGOs actively working in the disability sector, employers and deputy governors of municipalities and each province; totally 58 members.

DAC has the roles and duties to provide technical advice on disability issues and rehabilitation; assist ministries, institutions and relevant organizations to develop; to promote the implementation; to propose revision, additional completion or amendment; to monitor and evaluate the implementation of policies, laws, national plans and strategies related to disability and rehabilitation; to communicate with the national and international community to exchange lessons learnt and experiences and mobilize resources both in and outside of the country; to organize national and international days and other events of persons with disabilities; to develop the report on implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to the RGC; and perform other tasks assigned by the RGC.

DAC has a Secretariat General serving as an executive entity with a management structure consisting of five units.

DAC at municipal and provincial levels and Disability Action Working Groups (DAWG) in line ministries and institutions have the roles and duties to assist the DAC to achieve its mandate stated above.

The Persons with Disabilities Foundation (PWDF) is an administrative public institution established by the Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the

Rights of Persons with Disabilities promulgated by the Royal Kram No. NS/RKM/ 0709/010 dated 3rd July 2009. PWDF has duties to disburse funds for projects and program implementation to help persons with disabilities and support institutions providing services to persons with disabilities such as health, rehabilitation, education, technical and vocational training and job placement.

PWDF is also an institution to promote and enhance the welfare of persons with disabilities, particularly poor persons with disabilities, veterans with disabilities without access to rehabilitation, the families of poor persons with disabilities who are dependent on the person with disabilities and veterans with disabilities to access rehabilitation or skilled persons with disabilities who are unemployed. PWDF plays an important role in the provision of loans for reasonable accommodation.

The Disability Rights Administration (DRA) is currently an entity under the Department of Welfare of the Persons with Disabilities of MoSVY, and has roles and duties: to disseminate policy, national laws, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; to monitor and evaluate and promote implementation of the Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and related regulations; to facilitate and encourage persons with disabilities, ministries and institutions, employers and legal entities to enforce the Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; to conduct inspections of ministries, institutions and legal entities, according to the Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; to provide counselling on legal aspects for persons with disabilities, ministries, public institutions, private sector, as well as relevant organizations; to provide facilitation and mediation services; to provide alternative resolutions on the conflicts arising under the framework of the Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; to enforce the interim fine in accordance with Article 54 of the Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to persons who are in charge of state institutions and legal entities failing to fulfil their obligations as stated in the Law.

10

Strategic Objectives

Strategic Objective

1

" Reduce poverty of persons with disabilities, through increase work and appropriate employment for persons with disabilities, to ensure their improved livelihood and enhance independence."

Strategies 1.1 Encourage ministries and institutions to develop policies and annual budgets to help persons with disabilities, particularly to ensure that persons with disabilities living in situations of poverty can access assistance from the State with disability related expenses.

1.2 Encourage ministries and institutions to provide accessibility to a range of in-home, residential and other community support services, including personal assistance necessary to support living and inclusion in the community and to prevent isolation or segregation from the community.

1.3 Promote the rights of persons with disabilities to ensure improved livelihood of the persons with disabilities and their families including adequate food, clothing and housing and to the continuous improvement of living conditions without discrimination because of their disabilities.

1.4 Promote the rights of persons with disabilities to access social protection without discrimination on the basis of disability and protection; equal access to clean water services and to ensure access to appropriate and affordable services, devices and other assistance for disability-related needs.

1.5 Encourage access by persons with disabilities, in particular women and girls with disabilities and older persons with disabilities, to social protection programmes and poverty reduction programmes; 1.6 Encourage ministries and institutions to assist poor persons with disabilities and their families to access assistance from the State with disability related expenses, including adequate training, counselling, financial assistance and respite care.

1.7 Encourage persons with disabilities to create self-employment such as jobs in agri-business; small, medium and large business, individual or collective businesses through providing loans at low or zero interest rate; concessions for employment or through provision of tax reduction and other legal incentives according to the law.

1.8 Increase collaboration with media agencies and widely disseminate information on job opportunities for persons with disabilities through mass media.

1.9 Increase prioritization of jobs and create reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities to access employment through promotion of implementation of the Sub-decree on employment of persons with disabilities in government ministries and institutions.

1.10 Increase opportunities for persons with disabilities to engage in volunteerism to gain experiences in the open labour market.

1.11 Provide tax and other legal incentives, to employers, educational, training, technical and vocational establishments who employ or accept, at an appropriate set quota.

1.12 Promote vocational and professional rehabilitation, job retention and return-to-work programmes for persons with disabilities.

 Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training  Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport  Ministry of Commerce  Ministry of Information  Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction  Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries  Ministry of Tourism  Ministry of Rural Development  Ministry of Industry and Handicrafts  Council for the Development of Cambodia  Council for Agricultural and Rural Development  Cambodian Mine Action and Victim Assistance Authority  National Social Security Fund for Civil Servants  National Fund for Veterans  Persons with Disabilities Foundation  National Employment Agency  Development partners  National and International Non-Governmental Organizations and Self-help

Groups  All relevant ministries and institutions  Relevant national and Sub-national authorities.

" Provide persons with disabilities with equal access to quality health services as well as physical and mental rehabilitation. "

Strategies 2.1 Increase the number of health and rehabilitation specialists through provision of technical primary and continuing education, and enhance knowledge on use of assistive devices and include these necessary parts at every hospitals, health centres, private clinics and rehabilitation centres etc in order to prevent patients from becoming disabled.

2.2 Provide training to families whose members are disabled, persons with disabilities and volunteers on methodologies of care-taking and rehabilitation for specific types of disabilities to enable persons with disabilities and their families in there habilitation of persons with physical and mental disabilities. 2.3 Improve and expand community based rehabilitation services, counselling and treatment for persons with mental and intellectual disabilities.

2.4 Enforce support policies for poor persons with disabilities in their community.

Strategic Objective

2

2.5 Enhance disability prevention programs with all citizens through maternal health care during pregnancy; following-up and diagnosis diseases causing disabilities in a timely manner; providing vaccinations and other medicines for disability prevention; providing nutritional programs; providing education and training on the causes of disabilities and medical treatment and physical rehabilitation in a timely manner.

2.6 Promote delivery of policy on support for persons with disabilities who have severe disabilities, are very poor and have no support; access to rehabilitation services at government rehabilitation facilities including provision of cash support for food during rehabilitation, cash disbursement and cash to cover the cost of transportation to the rehabilitation facilities.

Responsible Institutions  Ministry of Health  Ministry of Economy and Finance  Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction  Persons with Disabilities Foundation  Physical Rehabilitation Centres  Health Centres and Hospitals  Health service providers  Development partners  National and International Non-Governmental Organizations and Self-help

Groups  All relevant ministries and institutions  Relevant national and sub-national authorities

Strategic Objective

3

" Increase justice intervention services to reduce toward elimination, discrimination, abuse, violence and exploitation of persons with disabilities."

Strategies 3.1 Increase awareness on the potential of persons with disabilities to all citizens. 3.2 Promote awareness on equal rights, freedom and personal security of persons with disabilities through disseminations of policies, laws, national plans, and regulations related to disability issues.

3.3 Strengthen coordination mechanisms to help persons with disabilities to access freedom from torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment particularly of women and children with disabilities.

3.4 Promote training for officials in justice services to ensure the right of effective access to justice for persons with disabilities.

3.5 Enhance appropriate legislation, administrative and other measures to protect persons with disabilities from exploitation, violence, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including their gender-based aspects.

3.6 Ensure equal rights for persons with disabilities to own or inherit property, to control their own financial affairs and to have equal access to bank loans, mortgages and other forms of financial credit, and ensure the persons with disabilities are not arbitrarily deprived of their property.

3.7 Promote rights of access to justice for persons with disabilities on an equal basis with others including the provisions of procedural and age-appropriate accommodations, in order to facilitate their effective role as direct and indirect participants, including as witnesses, and all legal proceedings, including at investigative and other preliminary stages.

3.8 Enhance effective access to justice for persons with disabilities without charge and promote appropriate training for those working in the field of administration of justice, including police and prison staff.

Responsible Institutions  Ministry of Justice  Ministry of Interior  Ministry of Information  Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport  Cambodian Mine Action and Victim Assistance Authority  Disability Action Council  Disability Rights Administration  All media agencies  Development partners  National and International Non-Governmental Organizations and Self-help

Groups  All relevant ministries and institutions  Relevant national and sub-national authorities  Bar Association of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

Strategic Objective

4

" Strengthen and expand personal freedom and security and manage risks of humanitarian emergencies in disaster situations."

Strategies 4.1 Ensure the protection of persons with disabilities; that they are not deprived of their liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily and that any deprivation of liberty is in conformity with the law and that the existence of a disability shall in no case justify a deprivation of liberty.

4.2 Ensure the protection and safety of persons with disabilities in situations of risk, including situations of armed conflict, humanitarian emergencies and the occurrence of natural disasters.

4.3 Enhance services and programmes, including for personal assistance and peer counselling, that support persons with disabilities, especially those with multiple, extensive and diverse disabilities, in living independently in the community.

4.4 Provide disability-inclusive training for all relevant service personnel including persons with disabilities for disaster risk reduction.

4.5 Increase availability of assistive devices and technologies for persons with disabilities in preparing for and responding to disasters.

Responsible Institutions  Ministry of Interior  Ministry of Economy and Finance  Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Cambodian Mine Action and Victim Assistance Authority  National Committee for Disaster Management  Cambodian Red Cross  Ministry of Health  Ministry of Justice  Ministry of Information  Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology  Regional Committee for Disaster Management  Municipal and Provincial Committee for Disaster Management  Development Partners  National and International Non-Governmental Organizations and Self-help

Groups  All relevant ministries and institutions  Relevant national and sub-national authorities

Strategic Objective

5

" Ensure persons with disabilities have equal access to quality education and vocational training services."

Strategies 5.1 Increase primary and secondary education enrolment rates of children with disabilities.

5.2 Develop and increase study materials, including Braille in formats that are readily accessible for student with disabilities.

5.3 Enhance teaching of social development and life skills, to help persons with disabilities full and equal participation in education and as members of the community.

5.4 Promote education for persons with disabilities; particularly children who are blind, deaf or deaf blind, is delivered in the most appropriate languages and modes and means of communication for the individuals, and in environments which maximize academic and social development.

5.5 Increase and encourage the number of teachers that are employed, including teachers with disabilities, who are qualified in sign language and/or Braille, and to train professionals and staff who work at all levels of education.

5.6 Promote persons with disabilities to access general tertiary education, vocational training, adult education and lifelong learning without discrimination and on an equal basis with others.

5.7 Promote reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities to access quality education.

5.8 Promote integration in teaching curriculum content, lessons and positive attitudes and actions towards persons with disabilities in preschool, primary and secondary education.

5.9 Increase the number of scholarship opportunities for students with disabilities to continue their education at tertiary levels of education.

5.10 Provide opportunities to develop and utilize persons with disabilities creative, artistic and intellectual potential, not only for their own benefit but also for the enrichment of society.

Responsible Institutions  Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport  Ministry of Economy and Finance  Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training  Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction  Disability Action Council  Development Partners  National and International Non-Governmental Organizations and Self-help

Groups  All relevant ministries and institutions  Relevant national and sub-national authorities

Strategic Objective

6

" Promote participation of persons with disabilities in expressing their opinions, accessing information and participation in political life."

Strategies 6.1 Promote the participation of persons with disabilities to vote; or to be a candidate to be elected in accordance with the Constitution of the Kingdom of Cambodia and applicable Election Law.

6.2 Encourage and increase participation of persons with disabilities so they can effectively and fully participate in political and public life on an equal basis with others, directly or through freely chosen representatives.

6.3 Ensure that voting procedures, facilities and materials are appropriate, accessible and easy to understand and use for persons with disabilities.

6.4 Ensure the protection of the right of persons with disabilities to vote by secret ballot in elections and public referendums without intimidation and to stand for elections, to effectively hold office and perform all public functions at all levels of government, facilitating the use of assistive and new technologies where appropriate.

6.5 Ensure freedom of expression of the will of persons with disabilities as electors and where necessary, at their request, allowing assistance in voting by a person of their own choice.

6.6 Promote an enabling environment in which persons with disabilities can effectively and fully participate in the conduct of public affairs, without discrimination and on an equal basis with others and encourage their participation in public activities.

6.7 Promote participation in non-governmental organizations and associations concerned with the public and political life of the country and in the activities and administration of political parties.

6.8 Promote forming and joining organizations of persons with disabilities to represent persons with disabilities at international, regional, national and local levels.

6.9 Ensure that persons with disabilities are able to exercise their labour and trade union rights on an equal basis with others.

Responsible Institutions  Ministry of Interior  Ministry of Justice  Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport  Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction  Ministry of Public Works and Transport  Ministry of Information  Ministry of Rural Development  National Election Committee  Cambodian Human Rights Committee  Development Partners  National and International Non-Governmental Organizations and Self-help

Groups

Strategic Objective

7

" Ensure participation in social activities such as cultural, religious, sporting, artistic, recreation and other activities."

Strategies 7.1 Promote access to equipment and instruments in cultural sector in forms accessible to PWDs and to make TV program, movies, comedy and other cultural activities in the forms accessible to PWDs.

7.2 Ensure persons with disabilities have an opportunity to organize, develop and participate at all level in cultural, religious, artistic, sporting and recreational activities and encourage the provision, on an equal basis with others, of appropriate instruction, training and resources.

7.3 Increase opportunities for children with disabilities to have equal access with other children to participation in play, recreation and leisure activities, including those activities in the school system, through raising awareness on disability inclusiveness.

Responsible Institutions

 Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction  Ministry of Public Works and Transport  Ministry of Industry and Handicrafts  Ministry of Information  Ministry of Cults and Religion  Ministry of Rural Development  Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport  Disability Action Council  Development Partners  National and International Non-Governmental Organizations and Self-help

Groups  All relevant ministries and institutions  Relevant national and sub-national authorities

Strategic Objective

8

" Develop and enhance access to the physical environment, public transportation, knowledge, information and communication for persons with disabilities."

Strategies 8.1 Develop minimum standards or guidelines for the accessibility of facilities and services open or provided to the public, including religious, markets, health, recreational, parking, toilets and other facilities to be modified to facilitate access by persons with disabilities.

8.2 Raise awareness of accessibility of persons with disabilities to ministries, institutions and sub-national administrations authorizing production, construction and assembling to ensure accessibility by persons with disabilities.

8.3 Promote joint implementation of relevant ministries/institutions authorizing construction plans, constructions and inspection of constructions of public places to ensure the accessibility for persons with disabilities.

8.4 Enhance all types of public transport to facilitate accessibility for persons with disabilities.

8.5 Increase provision of driver's licenses and the application of priority signs for persons with disabilities.

8.6 Enhance translation to sign language, sound, large print, and Braille of media including online information, to ensure they are accessible for persons with disabilities.

8.7 Develop a standard sign language for Cambodia. 8.8 Increase the number of sign language interpreters, large print and Braille documents.

8.9 Provide an enabling environment for the performance or cultural services such as theatres, museums, cinemas, libraries and tourism and to facilitate accessibility of persons with disabilities to all key sacred, recreational and cultural sites.

8.10 Enhance access to public information for persons with disabilities in the appropriate forms and with technologies, by type of disability, in a timely manner and free of charge.

8.11 Promote accepting and facilitating the use of sign languages, Braille, augmentative and alternative communication and all other accessible means, modes and formats of communication of their choice by persons with disabilities in official interactions.

8.12 Urge private entities that provide services to the general public, including through the Internet, to provide information and services in accessible and usable formats for persons with disabilities.

Responsible Institutions  Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction  Ministry of Information

 Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Ministry of Public Works and Transport

 National and International Non-Governmental Organizations and Self-help

Groups  All relevant ministries and institutions  Relevant national and sub-national authorities

Strategic Objective

9

" Ensure gender equality and empowerment of women and children with disabilities."

Strategies 9.1 Enhance emphasis on women and children with disabilities and take measures to ensure the full and equal enjoyment by them of all human rights and fundamental freedoms through effective implementation of policies related to women and children with disabilities.

9.2 Ensure representation of women with disabilities in government decision-making bodies and ensure the full development, advancement and empowerment of women with disabilities, for the purpose of guaranteeing them the exercise and enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms through their prioritisation in government policies and strategies.

9.3 Promote women's situation particularly women with disabilities, as they are the back bone of the national economy and society, by transforming them into a dynamic force in cross-sectoral development, through implementation of government's Rectangular Strategy Phase III.

9.4 Ensure that women and young women with disabilities have access to sexual and reproductive health services on an equitable basis with girls and women without disabilities.

9.5 Ensure equal opportunities and equal remuneration for work of equal value for women with disabilities through promotion of women's rights.

9.6 Ensure the full enjoyment by children with disabilities, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms on an equal basis with other children.

9.7 Enhance participation in all activities related to the best interests of children with disabilities.

9.8 Ensure that children with disabilities have the right to express their views freely on all matters affecting them; their views being given due weight in accordance with their age and maturity, on an equal basis with other children, and to be provided with disability and age-appropriate assistance to realize that right.

Responsible Institutions  Ministry of Women Affairs  Ministry of Interior  Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training  Ministry of Health  Ministry of Commerce  Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport  Ministry of Rural Development  Ministry of Industry and Handicrafts  Ministry of Information  Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts  Ministry of Cults and Religion

 Relevant national and sub-national authorities

Strategic Objective

10

" Strengthen and expand cooperation at international, inter-regional, regional, sub-regional, national and sub-national levels."

Strategies 10.1 Organize and participate in events on disability at international, interregional, regional, sub-regional, national and sub-national levels.

10.2 Strengthen international cooperation, including international development programs that are inclusive and accessible for persons with disabilities.

10.3 Improve facilitation and support capacity-building, including through the exchange and sharing of information, experiences, training programmes and best practices.

10.4 Enhance cooperation in research and access to scientific and technical knowledge.

10.5 Enhance provision of appropriate technical and economic assistance, including by facilitating access to and sharing of accessible and assistive technologies, and through the transfer of technologies.

10.6 Enhance cooperation to contribute with DPs, including initiatives and programs in support of implementation of international, regional, sub-regional and inter-regional agreements.

10.7 Strengthen inter-regional exchange of experiences and good practices concerning disability issues and the implementation of agreements at international, inter-regional, regional, sub-regional levels.

10.8 Fulfil commitments as a member country, signatory or state party to international Conventions.

10.9 Enhance coordination for the disability sector at the national and subnational levels.

10.10 Strengthen and expand networks of persons with disabilities at national and international levels

Responsible Institutions  Ministry of Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation  Cambodian Mine Action and Victim Assistance Authority  Disability Action Council  All relevant ministries and institutions  Development Partners  Relevant national and sub-national authorities  National and International Non-Governmental Organizations  Others institution working in disability sector

6. Activities

The NDSP 2014-2018 provides a comprehensive framework for implementation of measures in response to disability. There is thus a need to develop an action plan and relevant mechanisms such as a financing mechanism, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) framework and legal frameworks for implementation of the NDSP and to provide a firm foundation for resource mobilization.

6.1 Implementation phases of the NDSP 2014-2018 The NDSP 2014-2018 will be implemented in the following phases: the establishment of a national M&E framework. During this phase, detailed and prioritized action plans (2014-2018) will be developed by concerned line ministries and agencies, including a specific action plan for strategic knowledge management and coordination functions.

 Phase II (2015-2016): This phase will continue to support planned actions in Phase I and will be expanded to include activities such as the establishment of a mechanism for the funding, knowledge-management, capacity development and disability mainstreaming at all sectors and levels, operation of the M&E and data management systems and start a few high-priority projects/programmes in each key sector as specified in their Action Plans to respond to disability issues.

 Phase III (2016-2018): This phase will continue to support planned actions in Phase I and II and will conduct the M&E and the mid-term review and is a phase of data or information collection in order to consolidate the progress of this plan. All ministries, institutions and sub-national authorities have to report on their progress to the Secretariat General of DAC to conclude and report to the government and to strengthen implementation of the plan until the end of the plan's cycle. Development of a rolling plan will also need to meet objectives of the Plan if implementation is incomplete.

Institutional Management Structure The DAC has full mandates and authority to coordinate disability activities, sufficient capacity and full qualifications, which are officially recognized and has the right to access direct funding from Development Partners.

At the ministerial level, Disability Action Working Groups have been established within relevant ministries and institutions in accordance with the Sub-decree No. 216 ANKr.BK dated 2nd May 2013, on the Organization and Functioning of DAC. The responsibilities of the groups are clearly defined, particularly in consultation with relevant departments to ensure that sectoral policies, programs and investment plans are disability inclusive.

Municipal and provincial DACs have also been established through Sub-decree No. 216 ANKr.BK dated 2nd May 2013, on Organization and Functioning of DAC. These municipal and provincial DACs have responsibilities for managing and monitoring of implementation of the NDSP 2014-2018 within their authority, with technical support from DAC and administrative support from the Secretariat General of DAC as needed.

At the sub-national administration levels, guidelines on development in the context of disability inclusiveness were launched in July 2014, under the leadership of DAC. The guidelines based on experiences generated in recent years through pilot projects, mostly at the Commune/Sangkat level and include recommendations on collaboration of sub-national administrations at different levels (Municipality/Provincial, City/District/Khan, and Commune/Sangkat) and particularly procedures for Commune/Sangkat to access technical expertise on disability from offices or departments at City, District, Khan or Municipal and Provincial levels.

Developing Action Plans All relevant ministries and institutions will develop prioritized action plans and estimate the cost to implement the NDSP 2014-2018, with technical support from the Secretariat General of DAC. These action plans will be closely aligned with the relevant sector strategies. A specific action plan will also be developed for coordination functions, including the roles of Disability Action Working Groups in line ministries and institutions. Guiding principles for the development of these action plans are included in Section 6.2 below.

Developing Financing Framework The financing of the NDSP 2014-2018 will involve a number of different funding modalities, with a mix of traditional instruments and new instruments related to disability finance. There is a need to ensure that these various modalities are properly coordinated and that potential funding partners have a clear overview of the costs and prioritization of activities under the NDSP 2014-2018. DAC will lead the formulation of the Disability Financing Framework, which will support a programme-based approach for response to disability issues in Cambodia.

6.2 Programming and Development of Action Plans The implementation of the NDSP 2014-2018 will require a programme-based approach to ensure the strategic coordination and prioritization of activities. Besides using programming based on the underlying causes for disability; activities which promote or support capitalizing on opportunities and expanded benefits and co-benefits to society, will be encouraged. Details of the action plan are provided in a separate document as required by the Council of Ministers. The principles will be followed in the development of the programme, which will be based on the action plan.

Building on sectoral ministries and institutions strategy The disability action plans of relevant ministries and institutions to be included in the programme of NDSP 2014-2018, will not be developed as stand-alone documents within the respective ministries and institutions. In fact, some new actions focusing on disability will be proposed but most actions will be related to existing action plans within the ministries and institutions.

In all cases, the action plans will be closely integrated within the standard planning and management arrangements of relevant ministries and institutions. This will include the reflection of disability related actions in the budget process and the development of disability indicators in the sectoral M&E framework. Establishment of the implementation programme under the NDSP 2014-2018, will also target common issues shared by all sectors such as gender, social protection, research, education, communication, and financial control for the disability sector. All relevant ministries and institution will be asked to consider links with other sectors when developing their action plans, and the Secretariat General of DAC will provide dedicated support to review these links.

Partnerships It is important to recognize that development partners, national and international NGOs, the private sector, self-help groups and other civil society groups are important actors in the implementation of NDSP 2014-2018. Although, strategic plan is a government document focusing on the use of public resources, it is essential that these resources are used as a catalyst for broader action and measures by other stakeholders to respond to disability issues. In this case, government institutions will be encouraged to engage all relevant partners in the development of their action plans and to identify partnerships in implementing their action plans.

7. Financial Resources

To implement the NDSP 2014-2018 there is financial support from development partners working in the disability sector. These development partners previously provided financial assistance and are committed to continue their support with facilitation provided by DAC through its Secretariat General. Besides these relevant ministries and institutions must develop their respective budget plans. Moreover, charity and the private sector have also contributed to implementation of disability activities.

8. Monitoring and Evaluation

To ensure the NDSP 2014-2018 is effective and measurable there is a need for monitoring and evaluation as follows.

Monitoring and Evaluation has objectives to:  Measure effectiveness of effort in disability work.  Monitor activities to reduce discrimination against persons with disabilities and promote the rights of persons with disabilities, particularly improving their livelihood.

 Provide necessary information to meet reporting requirements under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Persons with Disabilities, The Incheon Strategy and the Decade of the Persons with Disabilities in Asia and the Pacific.

8.1 Key principles

The principles that underpin the framework are:  Using national systems and procedures: The framework will be integrated with the National M&E System. Indicators and monitoring procedures will rely as much as possible on data currently monitored by relevant line ministries and institutions. They will also be compatible with the guidelines of the Ministry of Planning for the National M&E System. The framework will be systematic and build on the on-going initiatives for monitoring and evaluation and reporting on disability.

 Mainstreaming M&E of disability into national and sub-national development planning: Procedures and indicators for measuring disability responses will be integrated in the National M&E System and will constitute the reference for monitoring the effectiveness of sectoral National Disability Strategic Plan and action plans at national and sub-national levels.

 Strengthening accountability, equity and transparency: The framework provides an approach for measuring to what extent resources have been efficiently and effectively used to achieve the targets set in policies and action plans, thus improving accountability towards the public, state institutions, civil society and development partners.

 Addressing gender issues: Women and children with disabilities are often among those more impacted by disability. The framework will address gender equity issues in performance, which respond to gender and disability.

8.2 Approaches A set of indicators for inclusion in the NDSP 2014-2018 will also be defined. A plan outlining activities, capacity development and costing for long-term implementation and mainstreaming of the framework within line ministries and institutions will be prepared.

In the long term (2014 - 2018) the framework will be operationalized at sectoral level by priority line ministries, institutions and projects, selected depending on capacities and resources available.

The Secretariat General of DAC is responsible for development of annual progress reports of the NDSP, through facilitation and supervision of DAC on annual progress of the NDSP. Relevant ministries and institutions, National Institute of Statistics (NIS) and other interested partners participating in this process must agree on indicators, procedures and responsibility for data generation. A partnership with research institutions and academia for managing the network of sites for long-term monitoring and evaluation will be explored.

8.3 Management and institutional structure for implementation Secretariat General of DAC must play a coordination role of development, M&E and implementation of the NDSP.

Disability Action Working Groups at relevant ministries and institutions and the municipality and provincial Disability Action Councils have the responsibility of coordination of the exchange of data and mainstreaming of the NDSP 2014-2018 in their respective ministries and institutions.

Progress of monitoring and reporting consistent with the NDSP 2014-2018, forms an important basis to ensure that the life of persons with disabilities in Cambodia is improved, through the conduct of the mid-term review and final evaluation.

The organization of an appropriate data system on disability portraying or disaggregating data, in accordance with needs as stated in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other Conventions to which Cambodia is a state party; is necessary to facilitate M&E and reporting to government, partners and the United Nations. When data on population and national data on disability is available, the NDSP will be updated to ensure consistency with the updated data.

Focal Institutions All ministries, institutions and entities at both national and sub-national levels have primary responsibility for implementation of the NDSP 2014-2018, particularly activities specific to the sector and expertise of each ministry, institution and entity on all 10 strategic objectives. All ministries, institutions and entities have to conduct assessments of their respective existing policies and strategies in relation to the NDSP to define progress in each sector that is yet to be implemented and harmonized. All ministries, institutions, entities and relevant partners have to report achievements of their respective duties annually.

Mechanisms DAC will organize concrete processes for monitoring and recommendations for the attention of relevant stakeholders. Effective monitoring on the NDSP requires regular submissions by ministries, institutions, NGOs and private sectors through their reports and relevant information.

Participation by civil society Regular meetings with civil society will be organized to monitor and report on the progress of implementation of the NDSP. Those civil society representatives will be invited to participate or provide information through DAC, to the meetings.

9. Conclusion

The Royal Government of Cambodia set out the NDSP 2014-2018 as an appropriate measure for continued implementation of the national policies, by providing a framework for response to disability issues and guidance towards promotion of the disability sector in Cambodia. The NDSP 2014-2018 is a roadmap for leading and ownership of disability actions in response to the RGC's political platform and Rectangular Strategy Phase III, and in the best interests of persons with disabilities in the Kingdom of Cambodia and to respond to international obligations for which Cambodia has signed and ratified; such as the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and Incheon Strategy "Make the Right Real", Decade of Persons with Disabilities 2013-2022 in Asia and the Pacific; and implementation of the Law on the Protection and the Promotion of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

Glossary

Community Based Inclusive Development refers to an approach to development that ensures equal participation of all people in a community in all activities without discrimination. The WHO's guidelines on community based rehabilitation defines it as a strategy and development that is based on inclusion in a community as a goal to be achieved.

Community Based Rehabilitation refers to a strategy for rehabilitation, equal opportunity, poverty reduction and inclusion in a community; as it relates to persons with disabilities. The process for community based rehabilitation aims for inclusive socio-economic development i.e., persons with disabilities participate in all activities like the persons without disabilities at home and in their community. Community based rehabilitation also aims to develop and maintain the support to persons with disabilities meaning that community based rehabilitation has to be sustainable and avoid the workload of external support in a very short time.

Incheon Strategy refers to the strategic plan on disability for Asia and the Pacific, and also the new decade of persons with disabilities for 2013-2022, developed building on the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Biwako Millennium Framework for Action and Biwako Plus Five towards inclusion without restriction and a society based on the fundamental rights for persons with disabilities in Asia and the Pacific. Incheon Strategy "Make the Right Real" for persons with disabilities in Asia and the Pacific was adopted in Incheon, Republic of Korea in November 2012.

Explosive Remnants of War refers to harmful explosives remaining from the civil conflicts; that include landmines, cluster bombs, man-made grenades and unexploded remnants, which continue to cause harm to people and constrain community development.

Persons with Disabilities refers to those who lack, lose or damage any physical or mental functions, which results in a disturbance to their daily life or activities, such as physical, visual hearing, intellectual impairments, mental disorders and any other types of disabilities toward the insurmountable end of the scale.

Barrier free environment for disabled refers to an approach using principles to respond to disability based on a model society to reduce pressure and barriers to persons with disabilities and a community as a whole, and seeks responsibility and discharge of burden. A barrier free environment for disability seeks to create an environment without barrier for the persons with disabilities. It may relate to the physical, social and mental environments of persons with disabilities.

Self-Help Group refers to the group of persons with disabilities established to help each other and is operated by persons with disabilities, who have the will to enable the neighbours in their society to become independent and confident.

Self-Help Organization refers to an organization operated by persons with disabilities with the will to enable their neighbours in a society to become self-empowered, independent and self-confident.

Disability Action Council Secretariat General Address : Ministry Social Affairs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation Building #788, Preah Monivong Blvd, BouengTrabek, Chamkamorn, Phnom Penh, Cambodia, PO Box 155 Tel : +855-23-727-428

Fax : +855-23-727-426