12. A4 NR4 Narrative -- final - 25 Nov english.indd

NEARY RATTANAK IV

FIVE YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN FOR GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

2014-2018

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA NATION RELIGION KING

3

NEARY RATTANAK IV

FIVE YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN FOR GENDER EQUALITY AND WOMEN'S EMPOWERMENT

2014-2018

MINISTRY OF WOMEN'S AFFAIRS

FOREWORD

Neary Rattanak IV is the five-year strategic plan (2014 - 2018) for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women in Cambodia. On behalf of the Cambodian Women Machinery (the Ministry of Women's Aff airs and the Cambodian National Council for Women) I would like to inform that:

In accordance with the current situation in the country and Phase III of the Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Eff iciency, the Ministry of Women's Aff airs, in partnership with relevant ministries/institutions and other partners, has developed the strategic plan Neary Rattanak IV to continue the government's eff orts to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women in Cambodia. The strategic plan has been prepared based on the lessons learned and results of the implementation of Neary Rattanak III as well as the findings and recommendations of the Cambodia Gender Assessment 2014. It reflects the vision of the Ministry of Women's Aff airs (MoWA) for the next five years with a particular focus on MoWA's long-term institutional strengthening and capacity development to fulfill our mandate as strategic gender policy advisor and facilitator with line ministries at national and sub-national levels. Neary Rattanak IV aims to support the reform process of the Ministry of Women's Aff airs to move from project-based activities to a Program-Based Approach, and promoting MoWA's role in providing eff ective gender analysis, institutional advocacy and policy advice across the entire Government.

Neary Rattanak IV is a policy instrument to foster gender mainstreaming in key government reform programs such as Decentralization and Deconcentration Program, Public Administration Reform, Public Financial Management Reform, Legal and Judicial Reform, and Land Reform. It also reflects the contributions and linkages to the implementation of national plans, policies and targets including the Cambodian Millennium Development Goals; the National Strategic Development Plan 2014-2018; the Education for All Policy; the Second National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against Women; the National Action Plan on the Suppression of Human Traff icking and Sexual Exploitation; the Social Security Policy; the MDG Acceleration Framework; the sectoral Gender Mainstreaming Action Plans; and the annual plans of the Cambodian National Council for Women. Moreover, Neary Rattanak IV responds to priority development issues in Cambodia, and incorporates regional and international cooperation agreements and commitments such as the CEDAW Concluding Observations.

The development of this strategic plan included a comprehensive consultation, cooperation, and partnership process with line ministries/institutions and other stakeholders at both the national and sub-national levels, including development partners and NGOs. This process resulted in a broad-based and inclusive strategy which addresses the challenges for achieving gender equality and the full participation of women in Cambodia's society.

It is my sincere hope that line ministries, other government institutions, civil society organizations and development partners will continue their support and valued cooperation for the successful implementation of the Neary Rattanak IV, for the benefit of our nation as a whole.

CONTENTS

FOREWORD ............................................................................................................................................................. 1 C ONTENTS .............................................................................................................................................................. 3 ACRONYMS .............................................................................................................................................................. 4 BACKGROUND ......................................................................................................................................................... 6 KEY ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES ................................................................................................................ 7 PART I: VISION AND MISSION ................................................................................................................................ 14 PART II: OBJECTIVES ............................................................................................................................................. 15 PART III: STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK ....................................................................................................................... 16 1. Economic Growth ....................................................................................................................................... 16 2. Access to Social Services and Protection .................................................................................................. 17 3. Cross-Cutting Issues ................................................................................................................................... 20 4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development towards Gender Equality ............................... 23 PART IV: ACTION PLAN .......................................................................................................................................... 25 PART V: FINANCIAL RESOURCES .......................................................................................................................... 63 PART VI: MONITORING AND EVALUATION ............................................................................................................ 64

A

CRONYMS

ASEAN Association of South East Asian Nations CCWC Commune Committee for Women and Children CCCS Committee for Climate Change Secretariat CCCSP Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan CCD/MoE Climate Change Department, Ministry of Environment CDB Commune Database

CDC Council for the Development of Cambodia CDHS Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women CGA Cambodia Gender Assessment

CMDG Cambodia Millennium Development Goal CNCW Cambodian National Council for Women CSO Civil Society Organization

CWEA Cambodian Women Entrepreneurs' Association D&D Decentralization and De-concentration DOWA District Off ice of Women's Aff airs

DP Development Partner GDCC Government-Donor Coordination Committee GBV Gender-based Violence

GII Gender Inequality Index GMAG Gender Mainstreaming Action Group GMAP Gender Mainstreaming Action Plan HIV/AIDS Human immunodeficiency virus/Acquired immune deficiency syndrome HSS HIV Sentinel Surveillance

HSSP Health Sector Support Program IEC Information, Education and Communication ILO International Labour Organization

IP3 (3-year) Implementation Plan JMI Joint Monitoring Indicator LGBT Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender LM Line Ministry

M&E Monitoring and Evaluation MAF MDG Acceleration Framework MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries MDG Millennium Development Goal

MEF Ministry of Economy and Finance MFI Micro-Finance Institution MIME Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy MLMUPC Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction MMR Maternal Mortality Rate

MoCS Ministry of Civil Service MoE Ministry of Environment MoEYS Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport MoH Ministry of Health

MoI Ministry of Interior MoIn Ministry of Information MoJ Ministry of Justice MoLVT Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training MoP Ministry of Planning

MoSVY Ministry of Social Aff airs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation MoT Ministry of Tourism

MoC Ministry of Commerce MoWA Ministry of Women's Aff airs MRD Ministry of Rural Development MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise NAA National AIDS Authority NAPVAW National Action Plan to Prevent Violence against Women NCCC National Climate Change Committee

NCDD National Committee for Sub-National Democratic Development NCDM National Committee for Disaster Management

NCGG National Committee for Green Growth NEC National Election Committee NEP National Employment Policy NGO Non-governmental Organization NIS National Institute of Statistics NPA-STSLS National Plan of Action for the Suppression of Human Traff icking, Smuggling, Labour & Sexual Exploitation NP-SNDD National Program for Sub-national Democratic Development

NR IV Neary Rattanak IV NSDP National Strategic Development Plan PAR Public Administration Reform

PBA Program-based Approach PBA C/S PBA Committee and Secretariat PDWA Provincial Department of Women's Aff airs PFMRP Public Financial Management Reform Program OS-WEE Operational Strategy for Women's Economic Empowerment RGC Royal Government of Cambodia

RSA Royal School of Administration SNA Sub-national Administration SNDD Sub-national Democratic Development SRH Sexual and Reproductive Health TVET Technical and Vocational Education and Training TWG Technical Working Group

TWG-G Technical Working Group on Gender TWG-G-GBV TWG-G sub-group on Gender-based Violence TWG-G-WEE TWG-G sub-group on Women's Economic Empowerment UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization WBA Women's Business Association

WCCC Women and Children Consultative Committee WDC Women's Development Centre

WEE Women's Economic Empowerment

BACKGROUND

The Ministry of Women's Aff airs (MoWA) and the Cambodian National Council for Women (CNCW) are the national machinery for the promotion of gender equality and women's empowerment in Cambodia. MoWA acts as a catalyst and advocate to encourage public institutions, civil society and the private sector to integrate gender equality into their policies and programs, and as a coordinator and facilitator for gender mainstreaming across government. It is responsible for monitoring and evaluating policies and programs to assess their contribution to achieving the Government's goals in promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women.

In 1999, MoWA prepared and implemented its first five-year strategic plan, called "Neary Rattanak". In 2013, MoWA in partnership with line ministries and institutions at national and sub-national level reviewed the eff ectiveness and eff iciency of the implementation of the strategic plans "Neary Rattanak I-III" and developed "Neary Rattanak IV". This was considered an important part of the Royal Government of Cambodia's (RGC) Rectangular Strategy of its fourth mandate, along with the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2014-2018.

Neary Rattanak IV will launch MoWA's transition from project-based activities to a program-based approach (PBA), and from implementation and service delivery to promoting social accountability for women and providing high-level strategic policy advisory services. With Cambodia's rapid economic development and a shift from least-developed to lower-middle-income country status, comes rising inequalities and vulnerabilities of under-served groups and areas. Thus, the plan will also mainstream issues related to vulnerability and disability, and include a sub-regional perspective, based on sub-regionally disaggregated gender analysis by sector, to better understand where the most severe gaps are across the country and target them with appropriate measures.

This fourth five-year strategic plan (Neary Rattanak IV) is designed to provide detailed action plans to support the transition from project-based to program-based approaches, with a strong emphasis on building capacity of institutions across government for gender equality.

This plan outlines the vision, mission, guiding principles, key goals, objectives and strategies to reach those goals, which are designed as thematic programs. Underpinning the thematic programs is a comprehensive overarching Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development Framework that guides the approach and the process.

Neary Rattanak IV incorporates the key gender themes from the "Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Eff iciency, Phase III"1, the NSDP 2014-2018, the Draft Cambodia Millennium Development Goals (CMDG) Report 2013, and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) Concluding Observations on the fourth and fift h periodic report of Cambodia2.

KEY ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES

In relation to promoting gender equality and women's empowerment, "the backbone of economy and society," in the last legislature of the national assembly, the RGC implemented Neary Rattanak III 2009-2013. This focused on increasing opportunities at all levels: economic, social and governance. Gender was mainstreamed into the NSDP Update 2009-2013 with some specific target indicators for monitoring the implementation.

During the implementation of Neary Rattanak III, the RGC through MoWA, line ministries and development partners achieved remarkable success in contributing to gender-responsive laws, policies and programs at national and sub-

national levels; the promotion of women's economic empowerment, including climate change and environment management; the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women; the improvement of health and nutrition for women and girls; the prevention of the HIV epidemic; the promotion of women's and girls' participation in education, together with the promotion of social morality, women and family values; and the promotion of women's participation in decision-making at all levels.

Women's Economic Empowerment

Cambodia is making good progress in women's economic empowerment. The RGC's long-term goal is to create jobs and ensure improved working conditions3, which directly contributes to economic empowerment of women. The Gender Inequality Index (GII) 2013 indicated that female participation in the labour market is 79.2 percent. In the Global Gender Gap Index 2013 for economic participation, Cambodia scores quite high for labour force participation, but lower for

professional and technical workers4. The growth of trade, services and manufacturing, agriculture, hotels and accommodation has increased jobs for women - accounting for 89 percent of all women's employment5. There have been increased employment opportunities for both women and men, and a decrease in vulnerable employment. The poverty rate dropped from 29.90 percent in 2008 to 19.80 percent in 20116.

The RGC has made regular eff orts to provide economic opportunities for women and has enabled women to generate incomes for their families. These eff orts include establishing Women's Development Centres (WDC) in 13 provinces, which play an important role in delivering business development services to women. Approximately 13,102 women have received vocational skills at WDCs. The Cambodian Women Entrepreneurs' Association (CWEA) was established in 2012, comprising 150 members, for developing women's businesses and strengthening the voices of women entrepreneurs in the private sector7.

The Millennium Development Goal Acceleration Framework (MAF) was developed to accelerate achieving CMDG Goal 3, focusing on women's economic empowerment and mobilizing public institutions, the private sector and development partners. Its three strategies are: 1) Strengthening vocational skills for women based on market demand; 2) Developing micro, small and medium enterprises; and 3) Improving livelihoods in rural areas.

Despite great eff orts and progress, there are challenges to be addressed:

 The wage employment sector off ers many opportunities for women, but the benefits are curtailed by low wages, poor working conditions, a gap between demand and supply of available jobs, and ASEAN economic integration.

 There is lot of potential for women to create and expand micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), but they have limited access to business-related services and resources, including finance. Most women-owned enterprises are informal and concentrated in less productive sectors.

 As income-earning opportunities are high in the domestic labour market and MSME sector, many women migrate from rural to urban areas, and to neighbouring countries, to find jobs. Generally, they face more risks than men, including physical abuse.

3 Royal Government of Cambodia, National Strategic Development Plan 2014-2018.

 There is limited eff ective cooperation between line institutions in delivering technical and vocational training and interventions to enable women to access job opportunities, or to promote women's entrepreneurship.

 There is a lack of cooperation between the public and private sectors to increase services of WDCs.

Education for Women and Girls and Attitudinal Change

Gender disparity in education has reduced at all levels, with more scholarships for poor students, especially girls, more schools at the sub-national level, and more girls' dormitories.

Since 2008, gender has been mainstreamed in policies and plans in education and vocational training, including the Education Strategic Plan (2009-2013); the Curriculum Development Master Plan (2010-2014); the Teacher Development Master Plan (2010-2014); the Master Plan for Capacity Development in the Education Sector (2011-2015); the Gender Mainstreaming Strategic Plan (2011-2015); the Policy on Human Resources in the Education Sector (2012); the Teacher Policy (2013); the National Policy of Cambodia Youth Development (2011); the MoLVT Strategic Plan (2009-2013); and the Social Marketing Strategy: Strategy for Gender Equity in TVET (2014-2018).

These laws, policies and plans have contributed to the promotion of gender equality in education and vocational training through improved physical infrastructure, better access and opportunities for girls to education and training, better social attitudes and favourable conditions for the participation of women at all levels and in all sectors. At the preschool level, there have been gradual increases in the enrolment of both boys and girls over the last five years8, contributing to children's increased levels of education and confidence in primary education and beyond. At the primary and secondary levels, the enrolment of girls is equal to that of boys9. In 2012, more girls than boys enrolled in lower secondary education10. In higher education, the proportion of female students has been increasing steadily, from 33 percent in 2008 to 37.6 percent in 201111. The proportion of girls in technical and vocational training has also increased.

The National Committee for Upholding Social Morality, Women's and Khmer Family Values has been implementing its multi-sectoral work plan aimed at reducing anti-social behaviour and increasing mutual respect, particularly for women and girls, ensuring harmony and happiness within the family and in the society as a whole. All relevant institutions at national and sub-national levels have been working together to reduce violations of human rights and the rights of the child, all forms of violence, human traff icking, theft /robberies and drug use.

Major challenges to expanding education and training opportunities for girls and women include:

 Negative social attitudes towards girls' education, illiteracy and low levels of parents' education, child marriage, domestic violence and opportunity costs of education.

 Child protection in schools remains limited, particularly for girls to travel safely to and from school, to be free from violence at school, and in terms of access to sanitation facilities.

 Community and parent engagement in school activities and children's education remains weak.

 Rapid industrial growth, ASEAN economic integration in 2015, together with the increasing level of materialism in society will drive the demand for skilled workers and will push young girls and boys into the labour market.

 Children of women who suff er gender-based violence12, girls with disabilities13, lesbian girls and trans-gender people14 have higher school absence and drop-out rates, due to their personal and family situation and/or bullying from peers.

8 UIS online database. UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Available online at: data.uis.unesco.org 9 Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport, Education Management Information System (2008; 2009; 2010; 2011). 10 Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport, Education Management Information System (2012).

Gender and Health

The maternal mortality rate (MMR) decreased by more than half, from 472 per 100,000 live births in 2005 to 206 per 100,000 live births in 201015. Access to maternal health care also improved steadily over the same five years16. Positive trends continue due to interventions by the Ministry of Health (MoH), other institutions and partners involved in increasing the number of health care providers at health centres, education programs and outreach by village health workers.

Stunting reduced from 50 percent in 2000 to 40 percent in 2010. Wasting decreased from 17 percent in 2000 to 8 percent in 2005, and slightly increased to 11 percent in 2010. Underweight rates decreased from 39 percent in 2000 to 28 percent in 201017.

Information on reproductive and sexual health is important for youth to understand their reproductive and sexual rights. In 2013, the RGC made a commitment to address this issue through the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport (MoEYS), by adopting a comprehensive curriculum for youth in primary and secondary education, as well as for those outside school. The curriculum includes information on reproductive and sexual health in relation to age, gender, gender-based violence, drugs, life skills and HIV/AIDS.

Remaining challenges include:

 Lack of skilled service providers in remote areas and lack of adequate medicine and modern health equipment in health centres. Social, cultural and economic factors all contribute to low levels of awareness, access to information, and health care seeking behaviour among women. Poverty and domestic violence compound health issues for women and girls.

 Despite the impressive decrease in MMR, there are still significant inequities in pregnant women's access to health care, and maternal mortality remains high compared to other countries in the region. Contraceptive prevalence has gradually increased however unmet need remains high at 17 percent.18 Non-communicable diseases are emerging as a significant concern, and women face a lack of detection and treatment for cervical, ovarian and breast cancers.

 Lack of access to clean water and sanitation has a negative eff ect on the nutritional status of women.

 There is a 3.4 percent prevalence of blindness among women older than 50 years, compared to 2 percent of men in the same of age group19. There is no explanation for the diff erence between the prevalence of blindness among men and women; this requires further study and an expansion of services.

 Social and cultural barriers continue to be obstacles in many countries, including Cambodia, to speaking openly about sexual health issues, particularly between mothers and youth.

Gender and HIV

The rate of HIV among men and women aged 15 to 49 years decreased remarkably from 1.7 percent in 1998 to 0.7 percent in 201420 (projection). This was due to a decrease in new infections through prevention eff orts, especially among high-risk groups, increased coverage of HIV blood tests, treatment with anti-HIV drugs and improved information services and communication from ministries and stakeholders.

Cambodia achieved the universal goal of access to services for the treatment of women and men, girls and boys, with a rate of up to 89.5 percent for the needy21. As a result of this achievement, the estimated deaths from AIDS and HIV transmission from mother to child decreased significantly in recent years.

15 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2010) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

16 Wang, Wenjuan (2013) Assessing Trends in Inequalities in Maternal and Child Health and Health Care in Cambodia. DHS Further Analysis Reports No. 86. Calverton, Maryland, USA: ICF International.

17 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2010) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

18 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2010) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey.

With the participation of relevant line ministries, the National AIDS Authority prepared a third National Strategic Plan for Comprehensive and Multi-Sectoral Response to HIV/AIDS (2011-2015), as well as training programs and guidelines on gender mainstreaming in response to HIV/AIDS. MoWA also prepared a Strategic Plan on Women, the Girl Child and HIV/ AIDS (2008-2012), and training programs on mainstreaming the fight against HIV/AIDS in the process of promoting gender equality.

Based on the Cambodia Gender Assessment 201422, challenges related to gender and HIV include:

 Heterosexual sex is the main mode of HIV transmission.

 Gendered power relations and social norms (e.g. women's subordinate status and relative lack of power to negotiate safer sex) exacerbate women's greater biological susceptibility to infection. Some women and girls are extremely vulnerable to physical and sexual violence and rape, which can cause HIV transmission.

 Lack of funding, fears about HIV status and negative attitudes among service providers specializing in AIDS pose obstacles to women living with HIV accessing services and information about family planning and infant care.

 Other target groups vulnerable to HIV infection and transmission include female entertainment workers selling sex, injecting drug users, women in prison, gay people and youth23. Lack of comprehensive knowledge about HIV, sexual

conduct and hazardous use of alcohol and drugs, along with gender-based violence, increase the risk of HIV transmission among these target groups.

 The national clinical and policy guidelines responding to intimate partner violence and sexual violence are being developed, however currently there is no provision of free post-exposure prophylaxis in cases of sexual assault, relevant especially to women in most at-risk populations. There is also a lack of legal aid and legal assistance services for people living with HIV and most at-risk populations.

Violence Against Women and Girls

According to the 2005 Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey (CDHS), 22 percent of women had experienced physical, sexual or emotional abuse from their spouse. This is down from 25 percent in 200024.

Cambodia's commune database (CDB) records the number of families25 seeking help from local authorities for domestic violence. Between 2006 and 2010 the number of families seeking help for domestic violence reduced from 1.63 percent to 0.88 percent26.

Overall, compared to 2005, the 2009 MoWA Follow-up Survey showed fewer people found violence acceptable and more people recognized that violent acts were illegal27.

The 2010 CDHS reported that the percentage of women who agreed with one reason for wife beating was down from 55 percent in 2005 to 45.7 percent in 201028.

The policy framework to respond to violence against women and girls has improved in recent years. The 2nd National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against Women (NAPVAW II) (2014-2018) includes five strategic sectors: 1) primary prevention; 2) multi-sector protection and legal services; 3) law and policy; 4) capacity building; and 5) monitoring and evaluation.

In 2010, the RGC issued the Village Commune Safety Policy, containing measures against domestic violence and traff icking of women and girls.

22 Ministry of Women's Aff airs (2014) Cambodia Gender Assessment, Executive Summary. December 2014. Phnom Penh. 23 Liu, K. L. and Chhorvann, C. (2010) Bros Khmer: Behavioral Risks On-site Sero-survey among At-risk Urban Men in Cambodia. Phnom Penh; FHI 360 & National Centre for HIV/AIDS, Dermatology and STIs and National AIDS Authority (2012a) Cambodia Country Progress Report 2012: Monitoring the Progress towards the Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV and AIDS. Phnom Penh.

24 National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Directorate General for Health, Ministry of Health (2005) Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey.

There is awareness that some women and girls are at increased risk of violence or have particular challenges in accessing protection and social services. In recent years various research studies have broadened the understanding of violence against women and girls in Cambodia.

There is a greater focus on developing coordinated multi-sectoral social services and legal support across the country for women and children victims of violence. However, according to the Cambodia Gender Assessment 2014, there are still a number of challenges for the RGC to tackle in the years ahead. They include:

 While some data indicates spousal violence is reducing, prevalence remains high. New data is required to fully understand the current situation.

 There is little robust data on rape and sexual violence reported by victims, however reporting of rape and sexual violence in the family and other settings is high. Gang rape is higher in Cambodia than other countries in the region.

 Sexual harassment is prevalent in the workplace and in communities. Women in some occupations are particularly vulnerable.

 Although the policy framework has improved significantly, there is a lack of coordination between authorities, investigative resources and skills, and clear guidelines to carry out and enforce the laws. Some laws and policies also have gaps.

 Social and legal support services to survivors of violence are not systematically provided, available and accessible for all women and girls.

 Women with disabilities are more likely to suff er from family non-partner violence, when compared to women without disabilities29. Additionally, stigma, harassment and discrimination is commonly experienced by lesbian, bi-sexual and transgender people in Cambodia, yet their experiences of abuse or discrimination are oft en overlooked or ignored by the response systems, their families and communities30. One in five garment factory workers experiences sexual harassment in or around the workplace31, and 80 percent of beer promoters experience unwanted sexual touching. Data is lacking on other groups of women at increased risk32.

 An undetermined number of women suff ered sexual violence33 and/or forced marriage34 during the Khmer Rouge regime35.

Women in Public Decision-making and Politics

The RGC has taken several concrete steps to increase gender equality and advance women in decision-making, including in policies, laws and programs. Special measures have been implemented, resulting in positive increases in the proportion of women at national and sub-national levels. Obstacles to women's inclusion in public decision-making are well documented, and solutions have been proposed and agreed by stakeholders.

In 2012, women held 14.75 percent, or nine out of a total of 61 seats in the Senate36. In the National Assembly, female representation has more than tripled in two decades37. The number of women in Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Secretary of State and Under Secretary of State positions increased in 201338. The proportion of women in the judiciary has increased since 200839. Women comprise 20 percent of Deputy Governors at provincial/capital level, which is above the 2015 CMDG 3

29 Astbury, Jill and Fareen Walji (2013) Triple Jeopardy: Gender-based violence and human rights violations experienced by women with disabilities in Cam-bodia. Phnom Penh: AusAID.

30 Cambodia Center for Human Rights (2010) Coming out in the Kingdom: Lesbian, gay and bisexual and transgender people in Cambodia. Phnom Penh: CCHR.

31 ILO (2012) Action-oriented research on gender equality and the working and living conditions of garment factory workers in Cambodia. ILO Regional Off ice for Asia and the Pacific.

32 CARE Cambodia (2005) A Report on the Situation of Beer Promotion Women in the Workplace. Phnom Penh. 33 De Langis, Theresa (2012) "Moral Off enses" and Sexual Violations against Women Under the Khmer Rouge Regime, Code 6. Phnom Penh, Cambodia. 34 Cambodian Defenders Project (2011) The Mystery of Sexual Violence under the Khmer Rouge Regime. Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

35 De Langis, Theresa (2012) Briefing Paper on the ECCC, the Cambodian Women's Hearing, and Steps for Addressing Sexual Violence under the Khmer Rouge Regime.

36 List of Senators in the 3rd mandate, Senate of The Kingdom of Cambodia http://www.senate.gov.kh/home/index.php?option=com_content&view=articl e&id=1718&Itemid=12&lang=km

37 List of Members of National Assembly for 5th Mandate, No. 420.NA, The National Assembly of The Kingdom of Cambodia.

target. The proportion of women councillors in capital and provincial councils increased from 10 percent in 2009 to 13.23 percent in 2014. In district and khan councils, female seats have increased from 12.68 percent in 2009 to 13.85 percent in 2014. The percentage of female commune councillors increased from 15.10 percent in 2007 to 17.78 percent in 201240.

The proportion of women in the civil service increased from 32 percent in 2007 to 37 percent in 201341. Of 27 ministries, 20 reported an increase in the percentage of female personnel, with increases in female representation ranging from 0.27 percent (2008) to 7.9 percent (2013)42. Women's enrolment in the Royal School of Administration (RSA) is increasing, particularly in pre-service training43.

Despite progress, the following key challenges remain:

 Women in Cambodia remain under-represented in decision-making positions in politics, the public sector, and the judiciary.

 Discrimination impacts the ability of women to be promoted.

 Women are concentrated in sectors traditionally associated with women and at lower levels of government.

 At sub-national level, women face a number of challenges to participation in the public and political spheres, particularly workplace discrimination.

 The absence of temporary measures to 'fast track' the participation of women in public decision-making, such as quotas, slows progress.

 The electoral system impacts on opportunities for women in decision-making in several ways: in candidate selection, the placement of women on party lists and the absence of quotas for women.

 The responsibility for achieving gender parity in decision-making is largely perceived to remain with women, however it is also the responsibility of men.

 Within the civil service, women are concentrated in lower-level positions. Women in management are more likely to hold deputy positions.

 There has been no cooperation among stakeholders in the creation of a framework or a joint program for promoting women's participation in decision-making.

Gender Mainstreaming in National and Sectoral Policies

A number of laws protecting women's rights have been enacted by the RCG, including: the Criminal Code (2009), the Law on Administrative Management of the Capital, Provinces, Municipalities, Districts and Khans (2008), and the Law on Elections of Capital Council, Provincial Council, Municipal Council, District Council and Khan Council (2008).

The NSDP (2014-2018) includes indicators relating to gender equality and puts stronger emphasis on line ministries' roles in mainstreaming gender in their sectors.

Gender is mainstreamed in national reforms, such as Public Administration Reform (PAR), the Public Financial Management Reform Program (PFMRP) and the Decentralization and De-concentration Reform Program (D&D), as well as the 10-year National Program for Sub-National Democratic Development (NP-SNDD) and the 3-year Implementation Plan (IP3).

Notable progress has also been achieved in strengthening the institutional mechanisms to support gender mainstreaming, including the Technical Working Group on Gender (TWG-G) as part of the Government-Donor Coordination Committee (GDCC) and Gender Mainstreaming Action Groups (GMAGs) in line ministries. Most line ministries have also developed and implemented Gender Mainstreaming Action Plans (GMAPs). At the sub-national level, Women and Children Consultative Committees (WCCC) have been established at capital, provincial, municipality, district and khan levels. They provide suggestions and recommendations to the council, board of governors, governors and other council committees on issues related to gender equity and women's and children's issues within the authority, function and duties of the council.

Although there is good progress in mainstreaming gender in policies, programs and mechanisms to support gender mainstreaming at national and sub-national levels, some challenges still remain:

 There is limited capacity in line ministries and institutions for in-depth gender analysis, advocacy and gender mainstreaming.

 There are gaps in the implementation of laws, policies, plans and programs.  Gender mainstreaming has not yet been integrated into PBA format.  There is limited coordination between relevant stakeholders.  Links between technical departments of MoWA and GMAGs of line ministries and other technical working groups (TWGs) remain weak.

 There is limited budget for implementing gender-related plans and activities.  Sectoral policies, as well as policies and programs for gender equality, have not yet fully addressed the needs of vulnerable groups of women and girls44.

PART I

VISION AND MISSION

VISION

Cambodian women and men have equal rights, with women and girls enjoying personal and physical safety, participating fully in the whole spectrum of public life and decision-making equally to men and boys, and are economically empowered to guarantee their self-reliance and the well-being of children and families.

For this to be realized, MoWA's capacity needs to be realigned to meet the changing needs of women and men in society, and to focus more on upstream programs and policies. MoWA's role will transition to that of policymaker, leading government partners at both national and sub-national levels in gender mainstreming, by coordinating, planning, mobilizing resources and implementing transformative initiatives.

MISSION

Close gender gaps and promote gender equality and women's empowerment in all key areas by:

1. Mainstreaming gender in the process of national (Rectangular Strategy, NSDP) and sectoral (line ministry) policy and program development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.

2. Mainstreaming gender in key government reform programs such as SNDD, Public Financial Management (PFM), PAR and Judicial Reform, including cross-cutting areas such as climate change and vulnerable groups of women and girls.

3. Coordinating and monitoring implementation of specific national programs such as Women's Economic Empowerment, NAPVAW and women in public decision-making.

4. Scaling up the on-going sectoral gender mainstreaming work and supporting gender-responsive social accountability and social protection in services such as education and health, as well as in legal and civic rights.

5. Focusing on broad-based organizational and capacity development for promoting gender equality across government agencies and programs.

6. Targeting under-served areas and groups that experience the largest gender-based gaps and disadvantages.

PART II

OBJECTIVES

Neary Rattanak IV has the following main objectives:

1. Promote favourable conditions for increasing women's access to skills training, employment, productive resources, social protection, voice and decision-making in the economic sector.

2. Increase women's and girls' access to education and vocational training by promoting participation, awareness and favourable conditions.

3. Promote the provision of and access to quality and aff ordable health services responding to women's specific health needs.

4. Ensure safety for women and girls in the family and society through awareness raising and by implementing relevant action plans, laws and regulations to prevent gender based violence.

5. Promote the participation of women in decision-making at all levels through increasing the number of female civil servants and elected leaders, as well as strengthen their capacity and opportunities for promotion.

6. Improve aid eff ectiveness and development sustainability through institutional capacity development, ownership and partnership.

PART III

STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK

The Neary Rattanak IV Strategic Plan includes a core program for institutional strengthening and capacity development towards gender equality, through gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment in the context of economic growth, social protection and services, and cross-cutting issues. Thematic areas in Neary Rattanak IV are:

1. Economic Growth 1.1. Women's Economic Empowerment

2. Access to Social Services and Protection 2.1. Education of Women and Girls, and Behavioural Change 2.2. Health, HIV and Nutrition of Women and Girls 2.3. Legal Protection for Women and Girls

3. Cross-Cutting Issues 3.1. Women in Public Decision-Making and Politics; Gender Responsive Government Policies and Reform Programs 3.2. Gender and Climate Change, Green Growth and Disaster Risk Management

4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development toward Gender Equality

1. Economic Growth

1.1. Women's Economic Empowerment

Strategic Analysis

Women's economic empowerment is widely recognized as one the critical foundations for promoting gender equality and women's empowerment. Women have historically played a critical role in Cambodia's economic development, however they remain economically disadvantaged, particularly with respect to access and control over economic resources, opportunities for increasing their skills, decision-making and higher-level employment opportunities. The RGC has recently approved the Millennium Development Goal Acceleration Framework (MAF), which focuses exclusively on Women's Economic Empowerment. MoWA subsequently produced an Operational Strategy for Women's Economic Empowerment (OS-WEE), which provides a roadmap for longer term WEE program implementation.

In the Fift h Legislature of the National Assembly, the RGC will continue to implement economic diversification policies based on the competitiveness of the Cambodian economy, and link the economy to regional production value chains. It will pay special attention to increasing rice production and milled rice for export, raising manufacturing and agro-industry products for export, and furthering the Tourism Development Plan 2011-2020. It will promote entrepreneurship (including small and medium enterprises) especially among Cambodian nationals, covering how to run a business, investment options, incentives, consultancies, capital and management and production techniques.

Neary Rattanak IV will focus on women's economic empowerment by developing and implementing a PBA under the leadership of MoWA, in partnership with development partners and line ministries to support the Women's Economic Empowerment program through the TWG on Women's Economic Empowerment (TWGG-WEE). The program will involve various line ministries (including the Ministry of Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy (MIME), the Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training (MoLVT), the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), the Ministry of Tourism (MoT), the Ministry of Commerce (MoC) and others). The private sector, chambers of commerce and civil society organizations will also be involved. The PBA will be based on mutually agreed principles, actions and targets among these stakeholders, and the successful outcome will rely on all actors' cooperation and eff orts.

MoWA will transition from project implementation and service delivery to catalyst and provider of capacity development and technical advice on gender mainstreaming in the economic sector. The focus will be on ensuring that relevant line ministries and economic actors are systematically addressing specific targeted gender gaps in their economic, business and financial services, and MoWA is able to build line ministries' capacity for gender equality, and support and monitor their programs. Particular focus will be on MIME, MoLVT, MAFF, MoC, MoT, MIH, and others.

Improve women's status in the economy, particularly in formal employment, with increased incomes, livelihoods and social protection, and equal economic and social rights and opportunities.

Strategies

1. Align Neary Rattanak IV strategy for Women's Economic Empowerment and the Operational Strategy for Women's Economic Empowerment (OS-WEE) with the MDG Acceleration Framework (MAF).

2. Mainstream gender in the assessments for human resource development related to ASEAN integration and ensure inclusion of vulnerable groups.

3. Innovate models for cooperating with the private sector, particularly in developing 'green' social enterprises. 4. Promote the establishment and implementation of the National Employment Policy (NEP) and programs that include opportunities for women.

5. Expand women's benefit through improved working conditions, social protection and labour standards. 6. Facilitate women's equal access to the arbitration council for resolving labour disputes.

7. Facilitate women's equal access to vocational training at public, private or NGO facilities. 8. Increase understanding of how to create and strengthen women's formal enterprises. 9. Facilitate women's equal access to business services relevant for MSMEs. 10. Enhance networking capacity of women entrepreneurs. 11. Equip women with skills and competencies to manage their households in a socially and environmentally sustainable manner.

12. Ensure women's access to secure financial services. 13. Improve women's economic opportunities so that they have the choice to work, earn income and invest in livelihoods. 14. Promote and address women migrant workers' challenges in the process of developing migration policies and other migration programs.

15. Ensure the reduction of migration-related risks for Cambodian women workers.

2. Access to Social Services and Protection

2.1. Education of Women and Girls, and Behavioural Change

Strategic Analysis

The strategy on education complements, and is a necessary pre-requisite for the success of, the above strategy on economic empowerment. As Cambodia moves towards middle-income status and regional integration, there is an increasing need to promote equal access to high quality education relevant to the forthcoming needs of the rapidly changing labour market. The gender gap, particularly in secondary and higher education due to insuff icient locally available education facilities, combined with traditional values that place lower primacy on girls and women, needs to be addressed.

During the Fift h Legislature, the RGC will further promote implementing the 'Education for All' policy, improvement in the quality and eff ectiveness of education services, and will further develop the capacity of educational institutions and staff 45. MoWA is expected to provide GMAGs with technical support to analyze remaining gender gaps, advocate for and initiate change and monitor progress. For example, adult literacy and information, education and communication (IEC) materials for educating girls and preventing drop-outs have been part of MoWA's work, but they have been integrated into the line ministries' portfolios successfully over the years. Programmatic interventions would ideally be handled by MoEYS, while the role of MoWA can be moved to increasing social accountability and raising awareness among women and girls about their entitlements to services and social protection, and monitoring their access to these services.

MoWA will continue to coordinate with members of the Committee for Upholding Social Morality and Women's and Khmer Family Values, in the implementation of the committee's multi-sectoral strategic plan aimed at preserving good culture, including a culture of non-violence, and positive social attitudes towards gender equality.

Strategic Objective

Promote gender equality in education; particularly increase access of women and girls in vulnerable groups to education services through awareness raising, social accountability measures, scholarships and other financial assistance. Increase the participation of women in all areas of education service delivery and management and promote gender-responsive social attitudes.

Strategies

1. Improve technical capacity and commitment of relevant off icials on gender mainstreaming in policies, programs and planning in the education sector.

2. Increase access to day care and community kindergarten facilities.

3. Coordinate the development and implementation of the National Action Plan for Upholding Social Morality and Women's and Khmer Family Values.

4. Promote positive images of empowered women and girls and gender-sensitive role models for men and boys.

5. Conduct research studies on the needs of vulnerable women, including the aging, poor, disabled, ethnic minorities and those living with HIV.

6. Promote Sub-national Administration's participation and accountability to provide comprehensive and equitable education services.

2.2 Health, HIV and Nutrition of Women and Girls

Strategic Analysis

MoWA recognizes that gender inequalities are responsible for most women's health issues and that poor health and HIV/ AIDS delivery systems have a higher negative impact on women than men. There is therefore growing commitment among stakeholders in the health sector that strategies to improve health delivery and Health Equity Funds should be gender focused in order to increase their impact on women's lives and achieve gender equality.

During the Fift h Legislature, the RGC will continue implementing and updating the Health Sector Strategic Plan (2008-2015) to promote sustainable development of the health sector, aimed at improved sanitation, health, nutrition and well-being of the Cambodian people, particularly the poor and vulnerable (including women and children). MoWA will provide the MoH GMAG with technical support to analyze remaining gender gaps, and advocate for and initiate changes, where required. For example, IEC for reproductive health, HIV and malaria have been part of MoWA's work program in the past, but they should be integrated into the MoH portfolio. Programmatic interventions would ideally be handled by MoH, with the role of MoWA moving to increasing social accountability and raising awareness among women and girls about their entitlements to services and social protection, and monitoring their access to these services.

MoWA will continue to work with the National AIDS Authority to promote gender equality in the implementation of the 4th National Strategic Plan for Comprehensive and Multi-Sectoral Response to HIV/AIDS (2011-2015) and the development and implementation of the 5th National Strategic Plan (2016-2020).

MoWA will continue to contribute to the development and implementation of the National Strategy on Food Security and Nutrition (2014-2018).

Promote gender equality in the health sector by expanding women's access to information and high quality, aff ordable health care, including reproductive, sexual and psychological health, food security and nutrition, and prevention of communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV and STDs, and non-communicable diseases (eye care, cancer).

Strategies

1. Strengthen capacity and commitment of relevant off icials on gender mainstreaming in policies, planning and budgeting in the health sector.

2. Analyze and address gender disparities in the health sector.

3. Analyze and address gender gaps in lagging areas and address them in programs, plans and budgets at the sub-national level.

4. Contribute to promoting public awareness raising on reproductive, sexual and psychological health, food security and nutrition. Protect and fight against communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV/AIDS and STDs, and non-communicable diseases such as eye diseases and cancer.

5. Strengthen gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment in health-related national strategic plans and programs.

2.3. Legal Protection for Women and Girls

Strategic Analysis

While the legal framework and national strategies for protecting women against gender-based violence (GBV) and

traff icking are in place, significant action needs to be taken all at levels and across a range of diff erent actors to operationalize them to ensure women and girls are safe from various forms of GBV and traff icking.

Neary Rattanak IV will focus on legal protection for women and girls through the development and implementation of a PBA under the leadership of MoWA. This will be done in partnership with development partners and line ministries to support the development and implementation of NAPVAW II, through the TWG-G Sub-Group on GBV. Line ministries to be involved include the Ministry of Interior (MoI), MoH, the Ministry of Justice (MoJ), MoEYS, the Ministry of Social Aff airs, Veterans and Youth Rehabilitation (MoSVY), MoLVT, the Ministry of Planning (MoP) and others, including development partners and civil society organizations (CSOs). The PBA will be based on mutually agreed principles, actions and targets among these stakeholders, and the successful outcome will rely on all actors' cooperation and eff orts.

MoWA will play an important role in coordinating and overseeing the implementation of NAPVAW II and the related PBA, which will involve a range of activities and actors. MoWA will participate in developing and implementing the next National Plan of Action for the Suppression of Human Traff icking, Smuggling, Labour and Sexual Exploitation (NPA-STSLS), which is led by MoI. Other gender and legal issues include civil registration, women's awareness of their legal rights and access to justice.

MoWA's role is that of a facilitating leader, catalyst and coordinator to reverse the entrenched discrimination against women and to ensure women can enjoy equal civic and legal protection.

Because gender is a cross-cutting issue, it is challenging for MoWA to determine the scope of programs and resources for implementation, particularly for activities which are related to multiple ministries and institutions. MoWA's role is to coordinate and monitor overall results of such programs, while implementing their own specific activities. Relevant ministries and institutions need to ensure that gender-specific activities are incorporated into programs and annual plans, and to mobilize resources for implementation of those activities.

In the 5th Mandate, the RGC will continue to implement key activities in accordance with the strategy for legal and judicial reform. MoWA will continue to participate in the implementation process of activities under this reform strategy to promote gender equality in laws, regulations and policies, as well as to increase the proportion of women in the judicial structure and justice system.

To reduce all forms of violence against women and girls through eff ective implementation of the NAPVAW II (2014-2018) and National Action Plan to Fight Human Traff icking (2014-2018).

Strategies

1. Strengthen gender mainstreaming in laws, regulations and policies and address violence against women, migrants and marginalized women and girls.

2. Identify specific measures to address GBV and discrimination against marginalized women and girls in collaboration with relevant stakeholders.

3. Coordinate the implementation of NAPVAW II (2014-2018) through TWG-G-GBV under the PBA framework.

4. Develop and use systems for baseline data and monitoring of data related to all forms of GBV.

5. Promote public awareness on laws, regulations and services related to the prevention of GBV, and migration.

6. Increase the number and capacity of MoWA's Judicial Police Off icers at both national and sub-national levels to assist

GBV victims.

7. Strengthen and expand One-Stop Services for victims of GBV.

8. Contribute to the implementation of the National Plan of Action to Fight Human Traff icking, (2014-2018).

9. Contribute to the development and eff ective implementation of the 3rd and 4th Action Plans to Combat Traff icking in Persons in the Greater Mekong Sub-Region (2015-2018).

3. Cross-Cutting Issues

Neary Rattanak IV has recognized women in decision-making, gender mainstreaming, climate change, green growth, disaster risk management and vulnerable groups as critical cross-cutting issues. The needs of vulnerable groups of women and girls are integrated and addressed in all key strategic areas and interventions of Neary Rattanak IV.

3.1. Women Public Decision-making and Politics, and Gender Responsive Government

Policies and Reform Programs

Strategic Analysis

The RGC has recognized that sustainable development and good governance depend on women taking part in all decision-making processes. The most significant quantitative and qualitative gender gaps are in the areas of political participation and decision-making, due to deeply entrenched gender biases against women which systematically prevent women from getting equal access to these opportunities.

In the 5th Mandate, the RGC will focus on promoting women in the public sector through increasing the gender balance in line ministry management and strengthening women's ability to pursue leadership both at management and technical levels46.

These priorities could be addressed through active and strategic participation in the processes of SNDD, PAR, the National Election Committee (NEC), political parties and line ministries.

Strong political backing and high-level advocacy from CNCW would be instrumental in pushing this agenda forward. Through PAR there is potential to advocate for aff irmative action for women in the civil service to be implemented and monitored. MoWA works with the Ministry of Civil Service (MoCS) to maintain up-to-date statistics on women at all levels of the civil service, and monitor changes.

CNCW and MoWA can advocate with key stakeholders, including the political parties, for legislating aff irmative action and gender equality commitments in political party laws and policies, especially increasing the number of women candidates on party lists.

MoWA can supplement the policy demand side with additional supporting measures to increase the quality and quantity of the supply side, such as technical, leadership and management capacity development for women candidates and civil servants, women in leadership forums and support networks, and promoting women's access to higher education. MoWA and the Ministry of Civil Service need to ensure that women participate equally in regular civil service capacity development programs and opportunities.

MoWA will continue to work with LMs, in particular GMAPs to ensure that gender is mainstreamed throughout on-going RGC policy and reform programs, and to increase the national budget allocation for gender mainstreaming by targeting specific and adequate resources at the national machinery, as well as in line ministries, with solid gender-mainstreaming strategies. MoWA is planning to develop the first National Policy on Gender Equality. This, in conjunction with successful integration of gender equality measures at the reform level, will create an enabling environment and pave the way for successful mainstreaming at the sectoral level.

MoWA coordinates with PAR/MoCS and line ministries to ensure all programs, legislation and guidelines related to PAR are gender responsive. Capacity is needed on gender mainstreaming into public administration and public services of MoWA, MoCS, RSA and line ministries.

The NP-SNDD is an important vehicle for increasing women's participation in decision-making at sub-national level, as there is a strong gender-mainstreaming component to it. Through the NP-SNDD there is potential for quantitative and qualitative increases in women's leadership and decision-making at local levels. This can be done through technical support, capacity building and promoting networking among women leaders at sub-national levels across regions.

The RGC will continue to implement the PFMRP aimed at improving the eff iciency and eff ectiveness of Cambodia's public financial management system according to international standards. MoWA and the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will promote gender-responsive budgeting by encouraging all government agencies to consider the resource implications of mainstreaming gender into their on-going programs, and ensure that this total allocation is requested from MEF.

In stage two of the PFMRP, MoWA and GMAGs will monitor to ensure that gender equality measures are included in all line ministries' annual plans and budgets.

Strategic Objective

Promote gender equality in decision-making at all levels and mainstream gender in policies, plans, sectoral programs and key reform programs of RGC.

Strategies

1. Increase the proportion of women participating in the civil service.

2. Strengthen the capacity and ability of women civil servants and women in decision-making to fulfil their roles and responsibilities.

3. Increase the proportion of women in political positions.

4. Update and disseminate the Cambodia Gender Assessment and ensure that national statistical systems are gender-responsive.

5. Strengthen gender-responsive national and sectoral strategies.

6. Cooperate in mainstreaming gender into Implementation Plan of NP-NSDD.

7. Ensure that policies, plans, programs, legal regulations and processes related to PAR are gender-responsive.

8. Cooperate with line ministries to ensure they receive national budget for gender mainstreaming through the PFMRP.

9. Promote women's access to and control over land rights through gender mainstreaming in the land reform program.

3.2 Gender and Climate Change, Green Growth and Disaster Management

Strategic Analysis

Programmes related to climate change reflect the new development agenda for the Royal Government of Cambodia, as well as gender mainstreaming in climate change programmes. The National Climate Change Committee, which includes MoWA as member, will seek a deeper understanding of how to address the gender impact of climate change.

The Ministry of Environment, the National Climate Change Committee, and the National Council for Green Growth have developed the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan (CCCSP) 2014-2028, the National Policy on Green Growth and National Strategic Plan on Green Growth 2013-2030. In the process of implementing these policy frameworks, more attention should be paid to gender mainstreaming. MoWA in collaboration with the Secretariat of the Committee for Climate Change is promoting gender equality and women's empowerment in all relevant aspects including the National Council for Green Growth.

MoWA has developed Strategic Plan on Gender and Climate Change to contribute to the development and implementation of gender responsive policies related to climate change. This is not a stand-alone strategy but is cross-cutting and has been integrated into the implementation processes of the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan as well as sectoral climate change strategic plans of relevant Ministries.

MoWA will continue to participate actively in the National Committee for Disaster Management in the implementation of National Action Plan and Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction 2014-2018.

Strategic Objective

Promote gender equality in processes and policy implementation related to climate change, green growth and disaster risk management within line ministries and institutions at national and sub-national levels, to reduce the impacts on women and vulnerable women, and to contribute to and benefit from green growth.

Strategies

1. Strengthen the capacity and support of senior off icials and technical staff in gender mainstreaming in the climate change, green growth and disaster risk management program.

2. Mainstream gender considerations in the development processes and implementation of policy, programs and strategies on climate change, green growth and disaster risk management.

3. Ensure equal participation of women, and particularly vulnerable women, in coordination processes and advocacy on climate change at international, national and sub-national levels for women's interests.

4. Reduce the impacts of climate change and disasters on women.

5. Increase women's participation in green growth activities.

6. Create new innovative schemes and activities to address gender issues in climate change, green growth and disaster risk management which are tested and proposed to line ministries for integration into regular on-going programs.

4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development

towards Gender Equality

Strategic Analysis

Program-based approaches are the Government's preferred tool for implementing sector strategies and core reforms. PBAs are regarded as the optimal mechanism to promote national ownership of development programs, and thus are the off icial mechanism of aid eff ectiveness in Cambodia, to ensure coherent programing of resources, strengthen national capacities and systems, and most importantly, deliver development results more eff iciently and eff ectively. At the third meeting of the Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC) in June 2010, the RGC and its development partners endorsed and agreed to move forward with the PBA model in order to maximize the combined impact of domestic resources and external development assistance. A key component of a PBA is a comprehensive policy framework with government leadership and coordination of all partners mobilized around the policy framework as a minimum condition. Examples of such policy frameworks include the NP-SNDD, PFMRP, the Education Strategic Plan and the second Health Sector Support Program (HSSP II).

Gender was identified as one of the key thematic areas to be used for PBA in Cambodia, as well as one of the three crosscutting pillars for national development. In 2012, MoWA established the PBA Committee and Secretariat (PBA C/S). MoWA currently has two 'sub-PBAs' underway covering Women's Economic Empowerment and Gender Based Violence (NAPVAW). A PBA for gender equality requires MoWA to take the technical and political lead on facilitating and coordinating analysis and advocacy and ensuring that gender is mainstreamed across government processes. This will see a progressive reduction in MoWA's involvement in implementation of smaller service-delivery and awareness-creation projects at the community level, other than as innovative experimental pilot activities (such as action research on emerging issues) to be scaled up by the appropriate line ministries. It will progressively re-orient its eff orts towards broader dimensions of gender mainstreaming - research, policy development, monitoring and evaluation, coordination and capacity building. This in turn requires strengthening MoWA's current capacity for gender mainstreaming and coordination and for taking a lead role in advocacy across government. A stronger MoWA would provide stakeholders with an authoritative source on gender mainstreaming and gender issues in Cambodia and would reduce the need for line ministries and development partners to support diverse small initiatives through other ministries and agencies.

The UN CEDAW Committee recommended that an assessment be done to examine the national machinery for the advancement of women and related institutions, such as the TWG-G and GMAGs, and links to other key entities (e.g. other TWGs, MEF, MoP, CDC), and to provide recommendations for improvement.

A MoWA capacity assessment was carried out in 2010, however it only covered staff in MoWA at the central level. The biggest challenge in the coming years will be advocating for gender-responsive action across government (other key implementing line ministries and secretariats of inter-ministerial councils) as well as at the sub-national level, as functions and financial resources are devolved to the sub-national level. Increased attention to assessing the capacity development needs of the Provincial Department of Women's Aff airs (PDWA), District Off ice of Women's Aff airs (DOWA) and commune level staff is also very important.

A capacity development strategy has been developed, with particular emphasis on strengthening MoWA's capacity to mainstream gender in key sectors, including strengthening the capacity of technical departments to support and monitor gender mainstreaming efforts; developing capacity for transitioning from a project-based to a program-based approach to gender equality; and strengthening PDWA and DOWA capacity to eff ectively engage in and support gender-responsive sub-national planning, budgeting, monitoring and social accountability processes.

This core program will be progressive and on-going and will provide tailor-made capacity development services to the necessary stakeholders, both within and outside of MoWA, according to their functions and roles in the government-wide gender mainstreaming process.

Strategic Objective

To strengthen the institutional structure and capacity to promote gender equality through PBA and good governance, which includes vulnerable groups of women and girls47.

47

Strategies

1. Assess institutional and national machinery functions for promoting gender equality. 2. Revise structures, roles and responsibilities of national machinery for promoting gender equality. 3. Assess the capacity of each entity following the restructuring process (in accordance with the revised structure and network).

4. Develop capacity development materials for training under the capacity development program. 5. Develop the capacity of MoWA to be able to conduct capacity assessments and capacity development for line ministries to promote gender equality across sectors.

6. Strengthen MoWA capacity for planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), sector-specific gender analysis and gender mainstreaming in policies, planning and programs.

7. Strengthen GMAGs' capacity to integrate gender equality into their line ministry policies, plans and budgets. Ensure that the capacity of the national machinery is increased and harmonized, and sector-specific in approach.

8. Develop capacity of gender working groups in line departments on integrating gender in sectoral policies, plans and budgets at the sub-national level.

9. Strengthen mechanisms for promoting gender equality, aligning with CNCW for the implementation of national laws, policies and CEDAW.

10. Implement a PBA towards gender equality. 11. Mainstream gender across relevant sectoral TWGs. 12. Enhance system for information dissemination, communication and reporting of MoWA and stakeholders under Neary Rattanak IV and PBA on Gender Equality at national and sub-national levels.

13. Develop the PBA mechanism according to the guidelines of the public administration and public financial

management programs. 14. Strengthen the system for internal M&E of progress and operation of the mechanism to promote gender equality at sub-national and national levels.

women engaged in prostitution.

25 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

PART IV

ACTION PLAN

Strategies Indicators Key Activities Relevant Responsible Ministries /Agencies

14

1. ECONOMIC GROWTH

Women's Economic Empowerment

Overall Objective: Improve women's equal status in the economy through enterprise development, employment promotion and social proteclivelihoods.

1. Align Neary Rattanak IV, WEE and OS-WEE with the MDG Acceleration Framework (MAF). Neary Rattanak IV, OS-WEE are published and disseminated. Align the development of the OS-WEE to the recommendations of the Cambodia Gender Assessment 2014. MoWA, line ministries and other stakeholders x

M&E system for WEE program is in place.

Monitor and evaluate the implementation of Neary Rattanak IV, WEE and OS-WEE.

TWGG sub-group on WEE x

Mechanisms of the Gender Mainstreaming Action Groups of line ministries are functioning. Build the capacity of MoWA and line ministry staff on gender analysis and gender mainstreaming in policies and programs on economic development.

MoWA and line ministries x

Implementation of MAF48 is monitored and aligned with OS-WEE.

Coordinate the implementation and monitoring of MAF through the Working Group on WEE.

TWGG on WEE x

48 MoWA launched the MDG Acceleration Framework Cambodia Action Plan 2013-2015. It focuses on women's economic empowerment and contributes to the achievement of other C

Plan prioritizes three areas of intervention: (i) Providing training for jobs for women that are consistent with market demand; (ii) Enhancing micro, small and medium enterprises (Mto lead and grow their enterprises and move from the formal to the informal sector; and (iii) Improving livelihoods in rural communities, especially for poor women.

26

. Mainstream gender in the assessments for human resource development Research results about the impact of ASEAN integration are presented and disseminated. Contribute to studies and research by integrating gender aspects in MSME development,

related to ASEAN integration and ensure inclusion vulnerable groups. higher education, vocational training, wage employment and labour migration.

Promote the dissemination of results, best practices and policy

recommendations related to

human resource development. Integrate research findings in the

agenda of TWGG-WEE meetings.

templates to start the implementation of public-privatepartnerships based on legal options decided by MoWA.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

2

MoWA, line ministries and international organizations

MoWA, line ministries and international organizations

TWGG-WEE

3. Innovative models for cooperating with the private sector, particularly in developing 'green' social enterprises.

Number of cooperation agreements or MoUs between MoWA, NGOs and social or 'green' enterprises providing social benefits through income and employment opportunities for women and their families. Assess and select suitable legal options for establishing public-private partnerships, public companies or other contractual models at WDCs.

MoWA, private sector and NGOs

Zone and select WDCs by region and economic clusters with income earning opportunities for women, including public and private stakeholders and NGOs. MoWA, LMs, private sector and NGOs

Develop ToR and contract

MoWA, private sector and NGOs

27

by including gender-equality considerations.

Coordinate with MoLVT initiatives to enhance social security (social insurance) for formal sector workers. MoWA, MoLVTpartners Gender-responsive M&E system for the implementation of working conditions, social protection and labour standards Contribute to M&E of policies and programs for improving working conditions, social protection and labour standards. MoWA, MoLVTpartners

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

Employment opportunities for women, including disabled and other vulnerable groups, are increased and working conditions are improve

4. Promote the establishment and implementation of the National Employment Policy (NEP) and programs that include opportunities for women.

Programs on employment opportunities for women. Coordinate and collaborate with MoLVT to incorporate and monitor gender-equitable employment targets. MoWA, MoLVT and development partners

5. Expand women's benefit through improved working conditions, social protection and labour standards. Specific articles and references in the Cambodian Labour Law are aligned to the requirements of women and gender equality. Contribute to formulation of policies and programs for improving working conditions, social protection and labour standards in the private sector

MoWA, MoLVT and development partners

and development

is in place.

and development

6. Facilitate women's equal access to the arbitration council for resolving labour disputes.

Gender-sensitive records at the arbitration council.

Collaborate with MoLVT, ILO and employers' associations (CAMFEBA) on policies and programs to increase the share of women seeking labour conflict resolution.

MoWA, MoLVT, ILO, development partners and CAMFEBA

28

. Facilitate women's equal access to vocational training at public, private or NGO Gender-sensitive records at off icially licensed public and private institutions or NGOs. Integrate gender in the planand implementation procesTVET programs.

facilities. Align the supply of vocation

training to the demand of employers in the public, priv

and NGO sector.

Number of WDC trainees Review and update existing

applying the skills gained from vocational training. curricula at WDCs. Introduce innovative techni

learning modules and

methodologies, including thfor entrepreneurship development. Conduct trainings for WDC sin business, entrepreneurshdevelopment and job match Introduce and strengthen Mfor performance measurem Vocational training centres Review, take stock and sugg

include women-friendly facilities. the construction of women-friendly facilities at new andexisting training centres.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

7

ning

s of

MoWA and MoLVT

al

ate

MoWA and MoLVT

MoWA/WDC

cal

ose

MoWA/WDC, DPs and NGOs

taff

ip

ing. MoWA

&E

ent. MoWA x

est

MoWA, LMs, private sector and NGOs

29 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 Women-owned micro, small and medium enterprises are created or improved

8. Increase understanding of how to create and improve formal enterprises for women .

Women entrepreneurs have a better understanding of laws and regulations related to MSMEs.

In cooperation with MIH, MoC and MEF, conduct awareness programs on MSME related topics (business registration, customs, tax, etc.)

MoWA, MIH, MoC, MEF and women business associations (WBAs) x

Issues related to women-owned businesses are integrated in the agenda of the Government-Private Sector Forum (G-PSF). Compile, analyze and present critical challenges experienced by women entrepreneurs in the agenda of G-PSF.

MoWA and WBAs

Encourage women to participate in the G-PSF working groups and provide them with technical support.

MoWA, WBAs and G-PSF working groups

9. Facilitate women's equal access to business services relevant for MSMEs . Number of women benefiting from obtaining business services. In partnership with public and private providers of business services, including MFIs, conduct events, workshops, trainings to create awareness on business services for women entrepreneurs.

MoWA, LMs and MFIs

10. Enhance networking capabilities of women entrepreneurs. Number and membership of WBAs.

Together with MAFF, MoC, MoT and MIH, promote the formation and operation of WBAs and producer groups.

MoWA, LMs and private sector

Female membership of business associations.

Encourage women and negotiate with business associations to increase female membership.

MoWA, LMs and private sector

30

financial services provided by MFIs. Association (CMA), conduct financial literacy programs for

women.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

Poor women and vulnerable groups are investing in the development of livelihoods

11. Equip women with skills and competencies to manage their homes in a socially and environmentally sustainable manner.

Number of women applying life skills obtained from public and private service providers, including NGOs, in their households.

In cooperation with public and private service providers, conduct various life-skill development programs using training facilities at WDCs or in local communities.

MoWA, LMs, private sector, NGOs

12. Ensure women's access to secure financial services. Number of women-headed households receiving safe

In cooperation with MFIs and the Cambodia Micro-finance

MoWA, MFIs, CMA x

13. Improve women's economic opportunities so they have the choice to work, earn income and invest in livelihoods. Number of women engaged in commercially viable farming, gardening and off -farm economic activities in their homes.

In collaboration with LMs, NGOs and the private sector, provide training on innovative technologies and access to information and knowledge.

MoWA, MAFF, MRD, MoLVT, DPs x

Women benefit from cross-border labour migration and risks are reduced

14. Promote and address women migrant workers' challenges in the process of developing migration policies and other migration programs.

Number of women workers safely and legally migrating for temporary employment in ASEAN countries. Contribute to the development of policies and programs to support women migrant workers.

In collaboration with MoLVT, conduct awareness programs for women about the benefits and risks of migration.

MoWA, MoLVT and DPs/NGOs

31 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 15. Ensure the reduction of migration-related off ences against Cambodian women

workers. against migrant women workers. In cooperation with MoLVT, conduct awareness programs for MoWA, migratiocentres, recruit

women on how to seek legal and NGOs

advice and protection in host countries.

. ACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES AND PROTECTION

.1. Education of Women and Girls and Attitudinal Change

Number of off ences against women migrant workers verified by criminal records are declining. In cooperation with MoLVT, MoI and NGOs, monitor off icial records of criminal off ences

MoWA, MoLVT, MoI

n resource

ment agencies

2

2

Overall Objective/s: Promote gender equality in education; particularly increase access of women and girls in vulnerable groups to educaaccountability measures, scholarships and other financial assistance. Increase the participation of women in all areas of education service dresponsive social attitudes.

Strategies Indicators Key Activities Relevant Responsible

Ministries/Agencies

14

The development and implementation of polices, programs and plans in the education sector are gender-responsive with attention beigirls49

1. Improve technical capacity and commitment of relevant off icials on gender mainstreaming in policies, programs and planning in the education sector. Capacity level of relevant off icials in gender analysis in the education sector.

Gender analysis documents in the education sector.

Report on research studies on gender issues in education.

Number of policies, guidelines, programs, plans and budgets in the education sector that are gender-responsive.

Coordinate and/or manage the collection and application (to policies and programs) of relevant and up-to-date sectoral data (broken down by region if possible) and analysis to identify sectoral gender gaps.

MoWA, MoEYS, relevant ministries x

49 Vulnerable groups include elderly women, women and girls with HIV, women and girls from ethnic minorities, women and girls with disabilities.

32

Conduct research to understand the emerging issues related to gender and education, and MoWmin

response measures. Provide recommendations to MoW

MoEYS to address gender gaps and M & E impacts, with a min

particular focus on secondary and higher education. Address

how to reach the most

vulnerable and the disabled.

Strengthen monitoring mechanisms for implementing MoWmin

gender mainstreaming programs in the education sector. Capacity development and advocacy for gender mainstreaming in the education sector. MoWmin Coordinate and provide technical assistance in MoWmin

integrating gender into policies, programs, action plans and the budget of the education sector , including the 5-year strategic plan and annual work plan of MoEYS.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

A, MoEYS, relevant

istries x

A, MoEYS, relevant

istries x

A, MoEYS, relevant

istries x

A, MoEYS, relevant

istries

A, MoEYS, relevant

istries x

33

auditing in education. Conduct gender audit in the education sector, including a

gender review of existing policies, programs, plans and

processes.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

Report on gender audit in the education sector. Capacity development for relevant off icials on gender

MoEYS, MoWA, LMs

Reduce overage enrolment rate in Grade 1 and dropout rate in primary education, particularly in remote areas

2. Increase access to day care and community kindergarten facilities. Number of new day care facilities/centres. Feasibility study on the need for early learning centres.

Coordinate in addressing the needs found in the study.

MoWA, MoEYS, MoI x

Number of dissemination events and participating parents at the community level, including remote areas and ethnic minorities; and awareness-raising program on the importance of positive education for pre-school children.

Develop and implement education program for parents on the importance of child protection, child development and early education, including the importance of positive education for pre-school children.

Mainstream positive education in public awareness programs

Monitor the community preschool program, including parental/ community education and positive education for pre-school children.

MoWA, MoEYS MoI, DPs x

34

raising campaigns on social morality and positive attitudes main messages on social morality, positive attitudes Upholding SocialWomen's and Khm

towards gender equality and women's empowerment. towards gender equality and women's empowerment; Values

promote culture of non-violence.

particularly those who are living with disabilities, HIV, are from ethnic minorities, are LGBT, or are victims of GBV. Number of open dialogues between young men and women about positive, progressive gender relations and roles. Creation of forums, including debates among high school and university students to increase public awareness on gender equality and positive social attitudes. MoEYS, sub-natio(SNA), MoWA, yourelevant ministrie

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

Promotion of social welfare and positive attitudes toward gender equality

3. Coordinate the development and implementation of the National Action Plan for Upholding Social Morality and Women's and Khmer Family Values.

The National Action Plan for Upholding Social Morality and Women's and Khmer Family Values.

Update the National Action Plan for Upholding Social Morality and Women's and Khmer Family Values and coordinate its implementation. National Committee for Upholding Social Morality and Women's and Khmer Family Values

x

Number of public awareness-

Media campaign to disseminate

National Committee for

Morality and

er Family

x

4. Promote positive images of empowered women and girls, and gender-sensitive role models for men and boys.

Number of public awareness-raising campaigns and advocacy to promote girls' education and opportunities for vocational training.

Education campaign and advocacy to promote girls' education and opportunities for vocational training.

MoWA, MoEYS, the media, relevant ministries, DPs x

Number of awareness-raising programs on gender equality and the rights of vulnerable women and girls to education.

Creation and implementation of awareness-raising program, including the right to education of vulnerable women and girls,

MoWA, MoEYS, the media, relevant ministries, DPs x

nal authorities

th groups,

s, CSOs x

35

equality, social morality, women's well-being, and

reducing gender inequality at the community level.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

Number of training courses, awareness-raising campaigns, interviews, workshops, and public forums. Strengthen women's capacity in promoting gender equality at all levels through training courses, awareness-raising forums, interviews and workshops related to promoting gender

MoWA, relevant ministries, SNA, DPs

x

5. Conduct research studies on the needs of vulnerable women including the aging, poor, disabled, ethnic minorities and those living with HIV.

Findings from the report. Conduct research studies on gender discrimination against vulnerable women and set up response measures.

Research studies on the use of telecommunication and information technologies, including social information networks used for disseminating information related to vulnerable women and gender equality. MoWA, MoSVY, MoR, MoPT, relevant ministries, DPs x

6. Promote Sub-national administration's participation and accountability for providing comprehensive and equitable education services. Educational plans and budgets of the sub-national level are gender-responsive.

Capacity building of sub-national administration to respond to gender issues in education, including the needs of vulnerable women and girls in the process of designing and implementing sub-national plans and budgets.

MoWA, MoEYS, SNA, NCDD x

36 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 2.2. Health and Nutrition of Women and Girls, and HIV/AIDS

Overall Objective/s: Promote gender equality in the health sector by expanding women's access to information and quality, aff ordable health psychological health, food security and nutrition, and prevention of communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV and STDs, and non-communic

Strategies Indicators Key Activities Relevant Responsible

Ministries/Ag

commitment of relevant in the health sector are gender mainstreaming in the health

encies

14

Strengthen and expand mechanisms and strategies to support the development and implementation of gender-responsive national polincluding nutrition and HIV/AIDS

1. Build capacity and

off icials on gender mainstreaming in policies, planning and budgeting in the health sector.

Policies, plans and budgets

gender-responsive. Capacity development and advocacy for

sector.

MoWA, MoH, DPs x

Coordinate and provide technical assistance in integrating gender into GMAPs, policies, programs, action plans and budgets of the health sector.

Monitor and promote the implementation of gender mainstreaming programs in the health sector.

MoWA, MoH, DPs x

2. Analyse and respond to gender disparities in the health sector.

New gender analysis reports on gender issues in the health sector. Collect and update data and information on relevant issues to identify sectoral gender gaps.

Make recommendations to MoH to address gender gaps and promote implementation.

MoH, MoWA, NIS x

Develop and implement M&E mechanism to monitor the eff ectiveness of responses to gender issues in the health sector.

MoWA, MoH, NIS, DPs x

37

Develop capacity and experience on gender auditing, including the review of policies, programs, plans and processes. MoH, M

Capacity building and advocacy with SNA and development partners in analysing MoWA, M

and responding to health-related gender

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 diseases such as malaria, HIV/AIDS and STDs, and non-communicable diseases such as eye diseases and cancer. communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV and STDs, and non-communicable diseases (eye care, cancer) for the target groups, particularly for women and children. cancer) for the target groups, particularly for women and children.

oWA

Promotion of gender equality in the development and implementation of action plans and budgets in the health sector at the sub-natiofood security, nutrition, communicable and non-communicable diseases)

3. Analyse and address gender gaps in lagging areas into programs, plans and budgets at the sub-national level. Gender-responsive programs, plans and budgets at the sub-national level.

Analyse women's access to health services and gender gaps by geographic area to understand the diff erences and identify appropriate responses for each specific target group.

MoWA, NCDD, MoH, sub-national administration (SNA)

gaps (in specific geographical areas), particularly in planning and budgeting at the sub-national level.

oH, NCDD

4. Contribute to promote public awareness raising on reproductive, sexual and psychological health, food security and nutrition. Protection against communicable

Number of IEC programs on access to health information and healthcare services, including reproductive, sexual and psychological health, food security, nutrition, prevention of

IEC on access to health information and healthcare services, including reproductive, sexual and psychological health, food security, nutrition, prevention of communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV and STDs, and non-communicable diseases (eye care,

MoH, MoWA, SNA x

38 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

Work with relevant stakeholders and SNA to implement the IEC program at the MoWA, Mo

community level on access to health information and healthcare services, including reproductive, sexual and psychological health, food security,

nutrition, prevention of communicable diseases such as malaria, HIV and STDs,

and non-communicable diseases (eye

care, cancer) for the target groups, particularly for women and children.

H, SNA

Gender-responsive development and implementation of strategic plan related to reproductive health, food security, nutrition, commun

5. Strengthen gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment in health-related national strategic plans and programs. Maternal health is prioritized in the National Health Strategic Plan Participate in promoting the implementation of the National Health Strategic Plan, prioritizing maternal health issues.

MoH, MoI, SNAs x

Gender-responsive implementation of National Strategy for Reproductive and Sexual Health

2012-2016. Participate in the implementation of the National Strategy for Reproductive and Sexual Health 2012-2016, from a gender perspective.

MoH, MoWA x

Number of health centres receiving package of medical care for survivors of gender-based violence (GBV).

Number of 'referral cases' from/to health centres. Participate in promoting the implementation of NAPVAW II, particularly in setting up a package of medical care and referral mechanisms within the Health Care System for survivors of GBV.

GBV Working Group, MoH, MoWA x

39 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 Newborn Care (EmONC)

Improvement Plan 2010-2015. Plan 2010-2015. National Strategic Plan on HIV/AIDS 2011-2015. Coordinate and monitor the implementation of the National Strategic MoW

Plan on HIV/AIDS 2011-2015.

Implement the Strategic Plan on Women and Girls and HIV/AIDS in Cambodia. MoW

.3. Legal Protection for Women and Girls

mainstreaming in EmONC Improvement

A

A x

2

Overall Objective: To reduce all forms of violence against women and girls through eff ective implementation of the National Action Plan to PreII) (2014-2018) and National Action Plan to Fight Human Traff icking (2014-2018).

Strategies Indicators Key Activities Relevant Responsible

Ministries/Agencies

14

Gender is mainstreamed in Judicial Reform and the Legal System

1. Continue engendering laws, regulations and policies and address violence against women, migrants and marginalized women and girls.

Laws, new policies and relevant regulations for the justice system are reviewed to ensure they are gender-responsive and consider marginalized women and girls .

Participate in draft ing laws, and monitoring or amending policies to ensure they are gender-responsive and include marginalized women and girls.

MoWA, CNCW, MoJ x

Increased number of female judges, prosecutors and lawyers. Coordinate in developing partnership strategies in the context of the Working Group on Legal and Judicial Reform to promote gender equality.

MoWA, CNCW, MoJ, MoEYS, Royal Academy for Judicial Professions x

40 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

Create more scholarships for women/ young women so that they can study law

and upgrade their degrees; increase women's representation as judges, prosecutors and lawyers. Advocate for the increase of women's

representation in the justice system and

capacity building of female judges and prosecutors.

2. Identify specific measures to address GBV and discrimination against marginalized women and girls in collaboration with relevant stakeholders. Laws and regulations are revised from a gender perspective.

Number of cases of violence against women where off enders are convicted. Coordinate the revision of regulations, formulate and launch guidelines, and build the capacity of relevant actors to provide legal protection for women with disabilities, women engaged in prostitution and women working in the men's entertainment sector.

MoWA, MoJ, MoI x

Minutes and agendas of meetings and workshops. Initiate high-level discussions with relevant stakeholders, including LGBT people, to prepare strategies to promote the rights of and end discrimination against LGBT people in schools, the work place, communities and families.

MoWA, MoSVY, DPs, CSOs x

Reports and practical recommendations of studies are gender-responsive and cover the factors that lead to the provision of sex services. Undertake further studies to identify the root causes of women working in prostitution. Use these as a basis to design eff ective interventions/measures for problem solving and new programs to support women who are planning to look for new jobs outside the sex industry.

MoWA, MoSVY, relevant agencies

41 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

Agreement on interventions to address issues related to the sex industry. Initiate discussions with relevant stakeholders to identify solutions for women working in prostitution MoWA, Mo

(discussions should consider the possibility of punishing those who buy sex services).

framework. (2014-2018) at national and institutions and departments.

sub-national levels show suff icient budget to implement the activities. Coordinate and mobilize resources for the implementation of planned activities on the prevention of domestic violence and prepare the TWG-GBV operational plan. MoWA, LMs Prepare and disseminate a progress report on NAPVAW II through the TWGG-GBV. MoWA, LMs

SVY, relevant agencies

The National Action Plan to Prevent Violence Against Women Phase II (NAPVAW II) (2014-2018) is implemented eff ectively

3. Coordination in the implementation of NAPVAW II (2014-2018) through TWGG-GBV under the PBA

The number of TWGG-GBV meetings.

Reports of relevant institutions that participate in implementing NAPVAW II

Organize and facilitate TWGG-GBV meetings regularly.

MoWA, LMs, DPs x

Coordinate the dissemination of NAPVAW II at national and sub-national levels, with line ministries, provincial

MoWA, CNCW, MoJ, PDWAs and DPs

, DPs

, DPs

Organize mid-term and annual workshops to monitor the implementation of strategic areas of NAPVAW II.

MoWA, LMs, DPs

Implement practical measures to solve problems related to violence against vulnerable women and girls, especially girls with disabilities.

MoWA, LMs, DPs

42

Final report and results of Collect data on services provided

the survey on the prevalence victims of GBV.

of violence against women and children. Incorporate data from the survey

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

vulnerable women and girls and share results with the TWGG-GBV.

4. Develop and use systems for baseline data and monitoring of data related to all forms of GBV.

Reports on data collection system and monitoring of data related to GBV are developed and disseminated during TWGG-GBV. Collect and monitor data (DCMS) used by the Ministry of Women's Aff airs (MoWA) and other relevant stakeholders to monitor and evaluate the implementation of NAPVAW II.

MoWA, LMs, DPs x

to

MoP, NIS, MoJ, MoWA x

in the National Statistical System.

MoWA, NIS x

5. Promote public awareness about laws, regulations and services related to the prevention of GBV and migration. Knowledge of local authorities and communities about laws, regulations and services related to the prevention of GBV is increased. Disseminate GBV-related laws and regulations to the general public.

Organize forums to disseminate laws and related policies to local authorities and commune council members, especially about GBV.

MoWA, MoI, local authorities, PDWA

x

43 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 capacity of MoWA's Judicial Police Off icers at

both national and sub-national levels to assist GBV victims. 2018. Increased capacity of Judicial Police Off icers. victims. Develop organizational chart, roles, responsibilities and mandate of MoWA judicial police, as well as legal

procedures.

Develop Prakas on the nomination of judicial police agents at district/khan level.

Develop and disseminate guidelines for the judicial police of MoWA and PDWA. Cooperate with relevant institutions to

provide training to judicial police agents

Judicial Police Off icers increased from 141 to 525 by

Police Off icers through legal and socio-psychological training to assist

to ensure that they are fully capable of carrying out their duties.

7. Strengthen and expand One-Stop Services for victims of GBV. One-stop service centres for survivors of GBV will be established in at least two provinces.

Number of survivors receiving one-stop services from centres in two target provinces.

Increased number of survivors receiving legal consultation services related to divorce by 2018.

Coordinate with line institutions to set up and operate one-stop service centres.

Increase coordination and collaboration between the Government, service providers, private sector and relevant agencies/ institutions to promote a coordinated response strategy at sub-national level.

Develop a communication strategy, including hotline number, internet and media campaign, focusing on the most at-risk groups of women.

Set up a referral system for survivors of violence against women.

Organize study tours in-country and overseas to exchange experiences related to the development of one-stop service centres to assist victims of GBV.

MoWA, MoJ, MoI, MoH, MoSVY,

NGOs x

44 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 The National Plan of Action to Fight Human Traff icking (2014-2018) is implemented eff ectively

8. Contribute to the implementation of the National Plan of Action to Fight Human

Traff icking, (2014-2018). Report on the implementation of the National Plan of Action to Fight Human Traff icking (2014-2018). Capacity development of relevant people at the sub-national level on gender and labour migration; and at village level to prevent human traff icking and exploitation in target provinces.

Awareness raising at the village level to prevent human traff icking, exploitation, GBV and migration in target provinces.

Increase public awareness about regulations and services related to the prevention of human traff icking, GBV and migration through radio, public events, round-table dialogue, meetings, workshops and media.

Organize national Anti-Human Traff icking Day on 12 December every year.

Coordinate mainstreaming gender and migration in the plans of line ministries/ institutions.

Cambodian COMMIT Task Force, MoWA, MoI,

International Collaboration Committee x

45 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 development and eff ective implementation of the Third and Fourth Action Plan to Combat Traff icking in Persons in the Greater Mekong Sub-Region (2015-2018). implementation of the Third and Fourth Action Plan to combat Traff icking in Persons in the Greater Mekong Sub-Region (2015-2018). Plan to combat Traff icking in Persons in the Greater Mekong Sub-Region.

Continue to implement the agreement between Cambodia and Vietnam based on the Action Plan agreed by the two countries.

Continue to implement and amend the MoU on the Greater Mekong Sub-region.

Continue to implement the MoU between Cambodia and Thailand aft er amendments for year 2014.

Fast track the signing of the MoU between Cambodia and Malaysia, develop an action plan.

Conduct research on the prevalence of Cambodian human traff icking in China in order to develop a MoU for the two countries.

Deliver training on the strategy to combat human traff icking at the provincial level.

Develop and implement the Fourth Action Plan to Combat Traff icking in Persons in the Greater Mekong SubRegion (2015-2018).

Organize the tenth meeting of high-level COMMIT off icials and the fourth Ministerial meeting about COMMIT processes. Collaboration Committee

4

servants in decision-making positions (from DG to Head of Off ices) increased from 19 percent to 25 percent. percent; monitor progress. Cooperate and advocate with LMs on the promotion of women; their access to capacity development programs; and extend the retirement age of women in the armed forces. Update gender statistics in the civil service, especially women in leadership positions at all levels. MCS, MoWLMs

6 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 Advocate for increased numbers of women in recruitment and promotion at the sub-national level. MCS, MoW Coordinate the development and implementation of a strategic framework for the promotion of women's empowerment in political and public life. MoWA, M

3. CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES

3.1. Promoting Women's Participation in Decision-Making, and Mainstreaming Gender in RGC Policies and Programs.

Overall Objective: Promote gender equality in decision-making at all levels and mainstream gender in policies, sectoral plans, and key reform

Strategies Indicator Key Activities Relevant Responsible

Ministries/Agencies

14

Increased women's participation in decision-making at all levels of the civil service and in political positions

1. Increase proportion of women participating in the civil service. Percentage of women civil servants increased from 37 percent to 40 percent.

Proportion of women civil

Coordinate/collaborate with MCS and gender mainstreaming action groups (GMAGs) of line ministries (LMs) on the selection of new female civil servants, and the increase from 20 percent to 50

MCS, MoWA, CNCW, GMAGs of LMs x

A, CNCW, GMAGs of

x

A, NCD x

CS, MoI, LMs, and CSOs x

47 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 and ability of women civil servants and women in decision-making to fulfil their roles and responsibilities. servants receiving capacity development, training on leadership and procedures.

Number of trained women in decision-making

implementing their roles eff ectively. making positions in leadership, advocacy, negotiation, discussion and

gender mainstreaming.

Strengthen network of women in MoW

decision-making at the sub-national level for support and sharing experience and

lessons learned.

development program for women in decision-making at national and sub-national levels to increase their capacity to fulfil their roles.

Build the capacity of women in decision-

MoWA, RSA, NCDD and MoI x

A, RSA, NCDD and MoI x

Monitor and evaluate the capacity of trained women.

MoWA, RSA, NCDD and MoI x

3. Increase proportion of women in political positions. Proportion of female MPs increased from 20 percent to 30 percent.

Proportion of female Senators increased from 14.75 percent to 30 percent.

Proportion of female members of capital/ provincial councils increased from 13.2 percent to 15 percent.

Proportion of female members of municipality/ Hold discussion forum to share information and experiences of other countries on how to increase women's participation in politics.

MoWA, CNCW, NEC, political parties, MoP, MCS, MoIn, CSOs and DPs x

48 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 increased from 13.8 percent to 20 percent.

Proportion of female members of commune/ sangkat councils increased from 17.78 percent to 25 percent. participation of vulnerable groups in political and public life. Parties, MoInfo, NGOs

Facilitate advocacy with political parties to include women on candidate lists among those who are more likely to be elected.

MoWA, CNCW, NCDD, Political Parties, MoInfo, NGOs x

Develop a program and campaign to promote awareness and support an increase in

women's participation in

politics.

MoWA, CNCW, NCDD, Political Parties, MoInfo, NGOs x

Proportion of young women participating in politics, especially in political parties and as representatives at sub-national levels. Study, design and coordinate the implementation of programs to promote young women in politics.

MoWA, education institutions, youth network and DPs x

Development and implementation of the Government's policies, plans and programs are gender-responsive

4. Update and disseminate Cambodia Gender Assessment (CGA) and ensure key national statistical systems are gender-responsive. CGA 2018 produced and disseminated. Coordinate the development of CGA. MoWA, LMs, DPs x

Dissemination campaign and advocacy. MoWA x

Statistical systems and surveys are gender-responsive. Update and disseminate gender statistics on a regular basis (national and subnational).

MoWA, NIS x

Collaborate and provide technical assistance for gender mainstreaming in national statistical systems and surveys.

MoWA, NIS x

49 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 responsive national and sectoral strategies. NSDP, PIP and JMIs. monitoring of gender mainstreaming in NSDP and sectoral programs.

Coordinate the monitoring of the implementation of NR IV, NSDP, CMDGs,

PIP, JMIs, and GMAPs.

The first National Policy on Gender Equality developed Draft National Policy on Gender Equality reviewed. MoWA, CNCW

Consultation on the draft policy on

gender equality

MoWA, MoP, GMAGs, TWGG x

, TWG-G, CoM x

Gender-responsive development and implementation of RGC reform programs

6. Cooperate in mainstreaming gender into Implementation Plans of NP-NSDD. Gender is mainstreamed in IP3 phases 1 and 2 and in sub-programs. Collaboration and technical assistance in gender mainstreaming in IP3 phases 1 and 2 and in sub-programs.

MoWA, NCDD, LMs x

Collaboration with NCDD Secretariat to review and advise on gender mainstreaming in the annual action plan and budget plan.

MoWA, NCDD, LMs x

M&E framework is developed and implemented. Collaboration with NCDD Secretariat to monitor and evaluate the gender mainstreaming process and women's empowerment in IP3 sub-programs, with recommendations to NCDD.

MoWA, NCDD, LMs x

Strengthened capacity of PDWA and DOWA in the context of D&D. Technical assistance and capacity building to PDWA, permanent deputies of WCCCs and CCWCs in the implementation of gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment.

MoWA, NCDD, LMs x

50

Public Administration Challenges of gender mainstreaming in PAR annual plans.

in PAR: analysis and strategy for gender

mainstreaming in institutions, planningprocesses and outcomes.

Collaboration and technical assistance for gender mainstreaming in public administration management and servicprovider training programs. Gender-responsive training program for capacity building of civil servants. Collaboration with the Royal School of Administration (RSA) and the Ministry oCivil Service to provide training on

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 gender. Technical assistance to teacher trainingcentres and other training institutions.

national level produced and disseminated. mainstreaming at the sub-national level, based on the NCDD gender audit.

7. Ensure that policies, plans, programs, legal regulations and processes related to

Reform (PAR) are gender-responsive. Gender-responsive policies, programs and other documents.

identified. Collaborate with the Ministry of Civil Service and relevant ministries to integrate gender equality measures into five-year policy/strategy of PAR and

MoWA, MCS, GMAGs, RSA x

Collaboration in conducting gender audit

,

MoWA, MCS, GMAGs, RSA

e

MoWA, MCS, GMAGs, RSA x

f

MoWA, MCS, RSA, MoEYS x

MoWA, MCS, RSA, MoEYS x

51

program

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

8. Cooperate with line ministries to ensure they receive national budget for gender mainstreaming through the public financial management reform

Number of ministries/ institutions receiving national budget for gender mainstreaming.

Work with MEF to integrate gender in annual action plan and budget.

Integrate GMAP of LMs into ministries' strategic plans and budgets to ensure support of national budget from MEF.

Training on gender-responsive planning and budgeting.

MEF, MoWA, GMAGs of LMs, SNEC x

9. Promote women's access to and control over land rights through gender mainstreaming in the land reform program. Proportion of women who have land titles. Collaborate with the Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction to promote the implementation of land-related laws, policies and programs for the benefit of women.

MoWA, MLMUPC, Council for Land Reform x

Laws, policies and programs related to land reform are responsive to gender and vulnerable groups. Continue to build capacity and mainstream gender in laws, policies and programs related to land reform.

MoWA, MLMUPC, Council for Land Reform x

52 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 3.2. Climate Change, Green Growth and Disaster Risk Management

Overall Objective/s: Promote gender equality in processes and policy implementation related to climate change, green growth and disaster riinstitutions at national and sub-national levels, to reduce the impacts on women and vulnerable women, and to contribute to and benefit from

Strategies Indicator Key Activities Relevant Responsible

Ministries/Agencies

1

Gender-responsive policies, programs and strategies on climate change, green growth and disaster risk management

1. Strengthen capacity and support of senior off icials and technical staff in gender mainstreaming in the climate change, green growth and disaster risk management program. Capacity development program on gender in climate change, green growth and disaster risk management for the working group at national and sub-national level is developed and integrated into national programs of relevant sectors. Develop and implement Capacity Development program on gender in climate change, green growth and disaster risk management.

Capacity Development for the working group and relevant stakeholders at the sub-national level on gender in climate change, green growth and disaster risk management.

MoWA

National Council for Green Growth (NCGG)

National Climate Change Committee (NCCC)

National Council for Disaster Management (NCDM)

Ministry of Interior (MoI)

NCDD x

53 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 2. Mainstream gender in the development processes and implementation of policies, programs and strategies on climate change, green growth and disaster risk management. Policies, programs and strategic plans on climate change, green growth and disaster risk management are gender-responsive.

Conduct a gender review of existing policies, programs, plans and mechanisms, including national policies, strategic plans and programs.

Coordination and technical support in the integration of gender in the development and implementation of policy, programs, action plans and budgets of relevant sectors, with participation from CSOs, the private sector and development partners (DP).

Collaboration and coordination with the Secretariat of the Cambodia National Committee for Climate Change to integrate guidelines on the impact assessment of climate change on gender to line ministries/institutions.

Create monitoring and evaluation framework on gender and climate change, green growth and disaster risk management, for monitoring and evaluation and promoting gender mainstreaming in line ministries.

MoWA, NCGG, NCCC, NCDM x

Climate change is mainstreamed in the program of MoWA.

Integrating climate change, green growth and disaster risk management measures into MoWA programs.

MoWA x

54 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 3. Ensure equal participation of women and vulnerable women and the inclusion of gender issues in coordination and advocacy on climate change at international, national and subnational levels. Percentage of women and vulnerable women participating in consultation processes, implementation and follow-up actions on climate change at international, national and sub-national levels.

Increase representation of women and vulnerable groups in seminars, fora and networking at international and national levels.

Conduct gender audit particularly on the gaps in empowerment of women and vulnerable groups in climate change, green growth and disaster risk management in order to prepare gender responsive measures.

Gender mainstreaming in climate change development plans at sub-national level. NCCC, Ministry of Environment (MoE), MoWA, NCDD, DPs x

4. Reduce the impacts of climate change and disasters on women and vulnerable women. Specific needs of women and vulnerable women are addressed in the process of climate change response and disaster risk management. Collaborate and coordinate with the national committees, line ministries and DPs to mainstream gender in national strategies on climate change and disaster risk management, and relevant mechanisms, including setting up eff ective feedback mechanisms for transparency, accountability and equality in response to disasters for the benefit of women and vulnerable women.

Initiatives for program design and activities in response to actual needs, such as personal safety and security, access to water, medication, health care and treatment, food, safe shelters and sanitation for women and vulnerable women are incorporated into disaster risk management and response.

NCDM, NCCC, MoWA x

55 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 5

. Increase women's participation in green Number of women participating in green growth Collaboration and coordination with NCGG, MoE, MAFF, line ministries, DPs

growth activities. activities. and the private sector to ensure increased participation of women in green growth activities.

MoWA, NCGG, NCCC, MoE, MAFF, DPs and the private sector x

New studies on gender and climate change, green growth and disaster risk management

6. Create new innovative schemes and activities to address gender issues in climate change, green growth and disaster risk management which are tested and proposed to line ministries for integration into regular ongoing programs. Number of studies on gender and climate change, green growth and disaster risk management. Collaboration in implementation and evaluation of the new pilot projects for  addressing gender issues in climate change, green growth and disaster risk management

(e.g. alternative energy production processes) and disaster risk management (e.g. sanitation, personal safety and food security).

Conduct research on the impact of natural disasters on women and vulnerable women in collaboration with NCDM.

Conduct a study on the roles and contributions of women, especially vulnerable women, in forest and natural resource management, in collaboration with MAFF, MoE and relevant ministries. MoWA, NCDM, NCGG, NCCC,

MAFF, MoE, DPs, CSOs

x

56

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development toward Gender Equality

Overall Objective: To strengthen the institutional structure and capacity to promote gender equality through program-based approaches (PBAvulnerable groups of women and girls.

Strategies Indicators Key Activities Relevant Responsible Ministries/

Agencies

1

MoWA and the national machinery structure reflect new functions as catalysts, policy advocates, advisors and facilitators

1. Assess institutional and national machinery functions for promoting gender equality. Report on institutional and national machinery functions for promoting gender equality, including recommendations related to harmonizing and strengthening these machineries.

Report on mapping development partner functions in promoting gender equality. Conduct institutional assessment of the national machinery for promoting gender equality and women's empowerment.

Prepare mapping of DP functions in promoting gender equality at national and sub-national levels, including government institutions, DPs and civil society organizations (CSOs).

MoWA, CNCW, GMAGs, SNAs

2. Revise structures, roles and responsibilities of national machinery for promoting gender equality. Revised and operational institutional structure, mechanisms and national network with specific roles and responsibilities for each entity. Develop and disseminate administrative letters and guidelines for revising structure, mechanisms and gender-related networks, with clear roles and responsibilities.

MoWA, CNCW, TWGG

Coordinate and provide technical support; monitor the new restructuring process and network, including roles and responsibilities; provide assistance to the machinery for promoting gender equality.

57

accordance with the revised structure and produce a detailed capacity development plan for each entity.

for training under the capacity development entity of the capacity development plan.

girls. Continue to set up and provide sup- port to sectoral sub-groups under the TWGG to strengthen harmonization of stakeholders' eff orts in specific thematic areas. Create a mechanism to work with LMs to integrate GMAPs in sectoral strategies and relevant national action plans.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

MoWA and the national machinery are able to carry out new functions as catalysts, policy advocates, advisors and facilitators for prom

3. Conduct capacity assessment for each entity following the restructuring process (in

network).

Report on capacity needs assessment and capacity development program for MoWA, CNCW, TWGG and SNA. Create an institutional development expert team to facilitate capacity assessment for each entity.

Conduct an assessment and

MoWA, CNCW, TWGG, LMs

4. Develop capacity development materials

program. Capacity development materials are developed.

Prepare guidelines and capacity development materials for each

MoWA

5. Develop the capacity of MoWA to be able to conduct capacity assessments (gender audits) and capacity development for line ministries (LM) to promote gender equality across sectors.

MoWA capacity for conducting capacity assessment and capacity development to LMs on gender mainstreaming.

Strengthen capacity within MoWA on training needs assessment and

create capacity development program on gender mainstreaming across sectors.

Recruit sector-specific gender specialists who can advise and counsel

MoWA technical departments, GMAGs and LMs on strategic the needs of vulnerable women and

MoWA

58 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 6. Strengthen MoWA capacity for planning, M&E, sector-specific gender analysis and gender mainstreaming in policies, planning and

programs. Capacity of MoWA to do gender Strengthen MoWA capacity on data

analysis and to produce the Cambodia Gender Assessment collection and analysis and policy analysis, particularly for producing

2018 (CGA). the CGA 2018, reporting on prioritized gender-related planning

Creation and dissemination of gender-responsive indicators. and costing of gender

High-quality reports which are mainstreaming of LMs.

MoWA capacity for planning, M&E, sector-specific gender analysis and gender mainstreaming in policies, planning and programs. Strengthen capacity within MoWA, including PDWA for gender situation and policy analysis: data collection, analysis and policy formulation.

MoWA

credible and acceptable by DPs and CSOs.

Government agencies are capable of incorporating measures to promote gender equality into their programs and budgets

7. Strengthen GMAGs' capacity to integrate gender equality into their LM policies, plans and budgets. Capacity of national machinery is increased and harmonized, and sector-specific in approach.

LM policies, plans and budgets are gender-responsive, with particular attention being paid to vulnerable groups of women and girls.

Capacity assessment of GMAGs on gender-related knowledge, gender analysis and gender mainstreaming, including the strategic needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable groups.

Capacity development for GMAGs, relevant DPs and MoWA off icials on gender mainstreaming and gender analysis by sector.

MoWA, LMs, DPs

59 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 8

. Capacity development for gender working groups of line departments on integrating gender in sectoral policies, plans and budgets at the sub-na- Line departments at the sub-national level are capable of mainstreaming gender in policies, plans and budgets in their own sectors. Capacity needs assessment of gender working groups at the sub-national level. Capacity development for relevant staff at the sub-national level through GMAGs on gender

tional level. mainstreaming and monitoring.

MoWA, LMs, DPs

9. Strengthening mechanisms for promoting gender equality, aligning with CNCW for the implementation of national laws, policies and CEDAW. National and sub-national mechanisms are clearly defined and operate smoothly in CNCW meetings.

The responsibilities of relevant stakeholders in the implementation of CEDAW continue to improve according to plan.

Ordinary and extraordinary meetings of CNCW and annual meetings to strengthen and promote the implementation of laws, gender equality and CEDAW concluding observations.

Dissemination campaign and advocacy with senior off icials at the national and sub-national level to promote the implementation of CEDAW.

Coordinate and promote consistency and strengthen mechanisms for promoting gender equality and women's empowerment in the CNCW agenda.

Monitor the implementation of laws and the CEDAW concluding observations, and provide recommendations to the Government.

CNCW

60

MoUs with implementing Clearly delineate roles and Mo

agencies. responsibilities for each stakeholder (MoWA, LM, CSOs) in the PBA. Each

will have its own mini costed work plan and associated budget. Ensure

that these are fully integrated into their regular plans and budgets.

MoUs with other stakeholders (LMs,

CSOs). MoUs with DPs. Confirm financial support and modality from DPs and preparation of MoU with each DP and with relevant ministries. Mo Partnership principles for PBA. Single common M&E framework and mechanism. Comprehensive PBA framework Develop overall coordination and monitoring mechanism: each PBA has a diff erent management lead but can use common methods for coordination and monitoring. Mo

by MoWA towards the new role as policy advisor to the Government. Strengthen DP agreement on one set of rules, procedures and requirements to support the program and reduce MoWA's transaction costs.

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

The 5-year MoWA strategic plan is implemented with PBAs toward gender equality

10. Implement a PBA towards gender equality.

Costed programs for WEE/ NAPVAW and capacity development. Finalize and agree detailed costed program that will be used as the basis for each PBA, particularly WEE and NAPVAW programs.

MoWA, TWGG, DPs

WA, TWGG, DPs

WA, TWGG, DPs

WA, TWGG, DPs

61

Develop indicators and monitoring

system consistent with JMIs of

NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018

11. Mainstream gender across relevant sectoral TWGs.

Thematic program goals and activities are reported on in sectoral TWGs.

Strengthen gender network with other TWGs and ensure that gender is represented and discussed in relevant sectoral TWGs in connection with the thematic program goals.

TWGG and other TWGs.

MoWA, TWGG, DPs

Gender and strategic needs of vulnerable groups of women and girls are addressed in key sectoral plans supported by DPs.

Advocate with gender-responsive donors to encourage their colleagues and other donors to consistently mainstream gender in all development assistance programs at the sectoral level.

MoWA, TWGG, DPs

MoWA's sustainability to perform routine duties towards implementation of PBA by implementing the Government's policies to strengtreform, public financial management reform and aid eff ectiveness

12. Ensure system for information dissemination, communication and reporting of MoWA and stakeholders under Neary Ratanak IV and PBA on Gender Equality is enhanced at national and sub-national levels. System for information dissemination, communication and reporting of MoWA and stakeholders under Neary Ratanak IV and PBA on Gender Equality at national and sub-national levels. Strengthen network and media on gender equality by sector.

Prepare and implement electronic media system to manage information and communication within MoWA and line ministries.

Coordinate dissemination of the National Report on Women's Progress and Gender Equality to relevant stakeholders at subnational, national and international levels.

Coordinate with DPs to promote gender equality at sub-national, national and regional levels.

MoWA, TWGG, DPs

62 NEARY RATTANAK IV 2014-2018 13. Develop PBA mechanism according to the guidelines of the public administrative and public financial management programs. Guidelines of the public administrative and public financial management programs implemented in the PBA system.

Implement human resource management program based on the guidelines of the public financial management program and gradually adapt to the PBA program on gender equality, especially related to administrative processes, management and evaluation of staff performance.

Set up and strengthen an internal management system for financial management responsibility and logistics. Coordinate with DPs through MoUs to implement within the PBA towards gender equality, focusing on impacts.

MoWA, TWGG, DPs

14. Strengthen system for internal M&E of progress and operation of mechanism to promote gender equality at sub-national and national levels is strengthened. Eff ective system for internal M&E of progress and operation of mechanism to promote gender equality at sub-national and national levels.

Formulation of system and mechanism for M&E to promote gender equality under the framework of PBA.

Continue to strengthen internal audit and inspection for MoWA, and adapt to the PBA.

MoWA, TWGG, DPs

PART V

FINANCIAL RESOURCES

The implementation of Neary Rattanak IV will be based mainly on financial support from the government and development partners.

The total cost of implementation is estimated at USD 31,100,000. As gender is cross-cutting across government agenda, this estimation does not include sectoral gender responsive programs.

Estimated costs broken down by thematic area are as follows:

Thematic Areas/Programmes Budget Estimation Potential Resources50

1. Economic Growth

1.1. Women's Economic Empowerment $4,900,000 Government Budget and DPs including UN WOMEN, ADB, SIDA, UNDP, JICA, Oxfam, ILO, USAID, EU, WB, IFAD, IOM and others.

2. Access to Social Services and Protection

2.1. Education of Women and Girls, and Behavioural Change $1,200,000 Government Budget and DPs including Action Aid, UNICEF, UNESCO, Plan International, UNDP and others

2.2. Health, HIV and Nutrition of Women and Girls $4,100,000 Government Budget and DPs including Fred Hollow Foundation, Global Fund, UNFPA, UN WOMEN and others

2.3. Legal Protection for Women and Girls $5,000,000 Government Budget and DPs including GIZ, UNFPA, UN Women, DFAT, Care International, PYD and others

3. Cross-Cutting Issues

3.1. Women in Public Decision-Making and Politics; gender responsive Government Policies and Reform Programmes $4,300,000 Government Budget and DPs including UNDP, SWISS, Oxfam, SIDA, UNFPA, UN Women

3.2. Gender and Climate Change, Green Growth and Disaster Management S1,200,000 Government Budget and DPs including ADB, EU, SIDA, UNDP, SWISS, GEF and others

4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development toward Gender Equality $10,400,000 Government budget and all DPs who work with MoWA including UNDP, SIDA, UNFPA, UN Women, JICA, GIZ

50 In the NR4 development process, the working group has received information about the commitment of support from DPs as mentioned in each thematic area, however, MoWA is still seeking further support/contribution from others.

PART VI

MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Annual Work Plan

Based on NRIV, MoWA in partnership with line Ministries/institutions and development partners will develop annual work plans in accordance with its mandate, roles and responsibilities. This will be done through TWG-G, CNCW and other stakeholders with the Department of Planning and Statistics as the Secretariat. The preparation and review of the annual work plan will be done at the beginning and end of each year throughout the 5-year period based on NR4, and other relevant policies and programmes. MoWA will play the role of facilitator in this process through annual meetings to reflect on the results of the year and plan for the future.

Monitoring and Follow-up

Based on the indicators in this strategic plan, annual work plan and report, and in partnership with relevant Ministries/ institutions, MoWA will review the medium and long-term progress of NRIV.

MoWA, CNCW, and TWG-G will coordinate the preparation of the progress report on promotion of gender equality and gender mainstreaming to share with line Ministries, relevant institutions at national and sub-national levels as well as development partners. Monitoring and follow-up of the progress on implementing Neary Rattanak IV will be integrated in the report.

Evaluation

To monitor the eff ectiveness and eff iciency of the implementation of Neary Rattanak IV, MoWA and its partners will carry out a mid-term evaluation and a national congress. All relevant stakeholders will participate in evaluating the achievements and propose future directions for the remaining period.

A national congress to evaluate the overall achievements and impact of the plan will be held at the end of the five years, with all key stakeholders. By updating the Cambodia Gender Assessment, key achievements in the diff erent areas can be verified and other targets will be reviewed against the national indicators related to gender equality and the empowerment of women.

MoWA will develop a single consistent national monitoring framework, which outlines the roles of MoWA, the National Institute of Statistics (NIS) and line ministries. Given the multi-sectoral nature of gender issues, monitoring and evaluation will be the responsibility of all implementing institutions involved. MoWA has a coordination and oversight role, while line ministries, NIS and other research institutions will be critical partners in data collection. Neary Rattanak IV contributes to achieving and following up key national indicators in the NSDP as shown below.

The following set of indicators will be used to assess progress towards achieving the objectives under each thematic area.

No Indicators Unit 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Data Sources

Female share of wage employment (15 to 64) 

1. Agriculture % 52 51 50 50 50 50 CSES

2. Industry % 60 55 50 50 50 50 CSES

3. Services % 30 35 40 40 40 40 CSES

Gender and Education

4. Girls who completed long-term technical and vocational skills education and above Number 8,000 8,500 9,000 9,500 10,000 11,000 MOLVT

5. Gross enrollment rate of girls in upper secondary school % 27.6 27.2 28.4 31.5 35.6 41.9 MOEYS

6. Gross enrollment rate of girls in higher education % 12 13 14 16 18 20 MOEYS

Gender and health

7. Maternal Mortality Rate (Per 100,000 live births) Number 206 140 130 MAIS (MOH)

8. Percentage of women visiting Antenatal Care at least 2 times % 87 88 90 91 93 95 HMIS/MOH

9. Prevalence of use of modern contraceptive methods % 37 39 51 52 53 54 MAIS (MOH)

Gender and violence

10. Families experiencing domestic violence Number 27,000 25,0000 23,000 20,000 18,000 15,000 CDB

11. Prevalence of domestic violence Number 12.8 12.8 11.5 11.5 11.5 11.5 MAIS (MOWA)

Women in decision making positions in public sector

12. Proportion of women holding decision making positions in public sector (from director-general to off ice level at national and sub-national levels) % 20 21 22 23 24 25 Ministry of Civil Service

13. Director General % 11 12 13 14 15 16 MAIS (MOWA)

14. Director of Department % 12 12 14 15 16 17 MAIS (MOWA)

15. Chief of Cabinet / Director of Provincial Department % 10 11 12 13 14 15 MAIS (MOWA)

16. Proportion of Women in Public Sector % 35.5 36 36.5 37 37 37 MoCS

17. Proportion of women's Seat in the Senate % 14.7 14.7 14.7 14.7 30 30 MAIS (MOWA)

18. Proportion of women's Seat in the National Assembly % 20 20 20 20 20 30 MAIS (MOWA)

Proportion of female councilors

19. Capital/provinces % 10 15 15 15 15 15 MAIS (MOWA)

20. Municpality/District/Khan % 12.68 15 15 15 15 15 MAIS (MOWA)

21. Commune/Sangkat % 18 18 18 18 25 25 MAIS (MOWA)

Gender and Climate Change

22. Female-headed households benefitting from Climate Change Program Number 50,000 70,000 90,000 110,000 130,000 150,000 MAIS (MOWA)

23. Families which have access to clean water year-round Number 1,900,000 2,000,000 2,100,000 2,200,000 2,300,000 2,400,000 MAIS (MOWA)

1. Economic Growth

1.1. Women's Economic Empowement

2. Access to Social Services and Protection

2.1. Education of Women and Girls, and Behavioral Change

2.2. Health, HIV and Nutrition for Women and Girls

2.3. Legal protection for Women and Girls

3. Cross Cutting Issues

3.1. Women in Public Decision-Making and Politics; Government Policies and Programs are Gender Responsive

3.2. Gender and Climate Change, Green Growth and Disaster Managerment

4. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development toward Gender Equality

Diagram of

Neary Rattanak IV

Five-Year Strategic Plan (2014-2018) for Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment

Ministry of Women's Aff airs of Cambodia

Trung Morn Street, Phum Dam Nak Thom III Sangkat Steung Meanchey

Phnom Penh, Kingdom of Cambodia Tel/Fax : (+855) 23 880 737 Email : mwa@online.com.kh Website : www.mowa.gov.kh Facebook : www.facebook.com/mowa.gov.kh