CBD Strategy and Action Plan - Cambodia (English version)

STRATEGY AND

ACTION PLAN

BIODIVERSITY

NATIONAL

FEBRUARY 2016

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

NATION RELIGION KING

National Council for Sustainable Development

Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia

MESSAGE

Cambodia has one of the highest levels of forest cover in Southeast Asia and rich in biodiversity. Forest ecosystems support biodiversity and provide many services, resources and functions important for the livelihoods and wellbeing of the people in Cambodia, for wildlife, for Cambodia's economy, and for mitigating climate change. The world's agricultural systems depend upon biodiversity to sustain genetic plant and animal diversity, to provide pollination services, and to maintain irrigation services. Urban cities depend upon biodiversity to provide clean drinking water to their growing populations, while coastal communities depend upon the natural infrastructure of coral reefs, sea grass beds, and mangroves to buffer them against impacts of climate change, including sea-level rise and increased storm surges. Besides, rural communities depend upon the natural infrastructure of forests, grasslands and wetlands to buffer them against increased drought, flooding, disease and natural disasters.

While biodiversity provides fundamental goods and services upon which all life depends, it is particularly important to the most vulnerable groups of our society. In Cambodia, indigenous ethnic groups and remote rural communities depend heavily upon biodiversity for their basic necessities such as food, water, shelter, medicine and their livelihoods.

As nations begin to plan for a green growth and climate-resilient future, they will be looking for ways to find the most efficient and innovative solutions to meet both their social development needs and their biodiversity conservation goals. Protected areas represent one of the most efficient and effective strategies available for addressing the global challenges of poverty alleviation, while adapting to and mitigating climate change, and maintaining key ecosystem services. Although the upfront investments in protected areas and other conservation areas are high, the long-term ecological, social and economic dividends can be significant.

In this regard, it is my great honour and pleasure, on behalf of the Royal Government of Cambodia,

to announce the official launch of the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP). The NBSAP has reflected our political will and our firm commitment to safeguard biodiversity that contributes to the country's economy and sustainable development, including poverty reduction, through the conservation and sustainable use of its biological, natural and cultural resources and other ecosystem services.

The NBSAP will guide line ministries and assist non-governmental organizations and development partners in developing concrete and appropriate measures and actions to strengthen effectiveness of

i biodiversity in contributing to the National Millennium Development Goal, National Sustainable Development Strategy, the Strategic Plan on Green Growth, and the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan.

Taking this opportunity, I would like to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the Ministry of Environment, the National Council for Sustainable Development and its line departments, academies, development partners, non-governmental organizations, and those who have contributed to making this NBSAP updated.

Moreover, our ability to strengthen biodiversity and its contribution to national development processes will be enhanced by active collaboration between line ministries and all relevant stakeholders that are direct or indirect responsible for managing and supporting an effective and coherent biodiversity conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and its components in Cambodia. The National Council for Sustainable Development and its Secretariat have a very important role to play in facilitating partnerships with various stakeholders, and monitoring the implementation of this strategic and action plan.

Once again, I urge all stakeholders from the Government, private sector, academia institutions, national and international non-governmental organizations and development partners to continue their close cooperation with the Ministry of Environment and the National Council for Sustainable Development for the effective implementation of this updated NBSAP, which would contribute to the development of Cambodia towards a green, climate-resilient, sustainable society and equitable sharing of benefits.

HUN SEN

ii

PREFACE

On behalf of the National Council for Sustainable Development and the Ministry of Environment, I would like to express my profound respect and sincere gratitude to Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, for his fu11 support and strong commitment to strengthen the contribution of biodiversity conservation and sustainable development. The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan is the comprehensive strategic document for biodiversity conservation and management in Cambodia and represents an important milestone for the future under the charismatic leadership of Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

I would like to express my deep gratitude to Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, and appreciation to Exce11encies, ladies and gentlemen from line departments, academies, NGOs, the private sector, and development partners for the good cooperation and support in the preparation and completion of the NBSAP updated.

The globa11y and regiona11y significant biodiversity values of Cambodia's rich natural resources are an essential part of our country's natural capital. Few places on Earth demonstrate so dramatically the fundamental link between people and nature: biodiversity supports Cambodians ecologica1Iy, economica1ly, cultura11y and spiritua11y. For many poor forest-dependent communities, biodiversity represents food security and livelihoods, crucial components of their weB-being and participation in society.

Article 6 of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (UN-CBD) demands the preparation of National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) by each signatory country and to ensure that this strategy is mainstreamed into the planning and activities of a11 those sectors whose activities can have an impact in both positive and negative on biodiversity. As a party to the Convention and in fulfilment of its obligation, Cambodia had developed its NBSAP in 2002 and has used it as the principal instruments for implementing the Convention at the national and sub national levels. While the Global Biodiversity Strategic Plan 2011-2020 has been adopted by COP-1 0 in Nagoya, parties are required to revise and update their NBSAP to reflect with this new international framework. Cambodia, under support from Global Environmental Facility through UNEP has processed of updating Cambodian NBSAP to use, protect and manage biodiversity for sustainable development in Cambodia. This document serves as a roadmap for supporting the environmental component on country's sustainable development.

The development of the NBSAP is based on a broad and inclusive consultation process to ensure consensus, strategic cohesion and ownership of the Plan by relevant stakeholders. Much emphasis is placed on building institutional capacity and knowledge to strengthen conservation management and enforcement, expand community livelihood opportunities, and support sustainable uses of biodiversity. Collaboration at unprecedented levels will be required with other line Ministries, with the private sector, with conservation NGOs and development partners to safeguard a biodiversity conservation and sustainable management.

Mobilization of funding resources for the implementation of specific programmes and projects in priority biodiversity conservation and action plan will be critical to achieve the goals and objectives of the NBSAP.

I would like to take this opportunity to express my deep appreciation to Department of International Convention and Biodiversity currently name as Department of Biodiversity, line departments and agencies, development partners and experts for their valuable inputs, assistance and active participation in the updating process of the NBSAP in a timely and effective

... 0.4 ...

Minister o nvironment, and Chairman of National Council for Sustainable Development

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) was developed under the overall coordination of the General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection of the Ministry of Environment, and the General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development. It has been updated from the 2002 NBSAP to align with the global Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and emerging issues of national significance. This updated NBSAP is the result of efforts and commitments made by various government institutions, academies, stakeholders, biodiversity specialists, conservation partners and non-governmental agencies.

The General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD)/Ministry of Environment expresses its most sincere thanks and appreciation to H.E Say Samal, Minister of the Environment and Chairman of the National Council for Sustainable Development, for his brilliant and visionary leadership and initiatives on nationwide conservation and protection of natural resources, especially biological diversity, which is part of the Royal Government's commitments to the Convention on Biological Diversity, and for his constant encouragement and support towards the successful development and updating of this strategic plan that will serve as the legal document for biodiversity management and conservation in Cambodia. Special thanks are conveyed to H.E. Dr. Mok Mareth, former Minister of Environment and former Chairman, and to members of National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC)1 for their guidance and advice. In particular, thanks to the Department of Biodiversity's staff (Department of International Conventions and Biodiversity) for their valuable inputs and hard work in facilitating, coordinating and engaging all the relevant stakeholders involved in the updating NBSAP process.

We would like to express our deep thanks for their support and encouragement to: H.E Chay Samith, Delegate of the Royal Government of Cambodia in charge of the General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection, H. E. Dr. Tin Ponlok, Secretary General of the National Council for Sustainable Development, and H.E Ouk Seiha, Chairwoman of the multi-sectorial Technical Working Group on NBSAP Updating (TWG-NBSAP). We also recognize the important work and significant support of the members of the TWG-NBSAP.

We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the consultants Prof. Jo Mulongoy for drafting and editing the strategic plan, Mr. Jady Smith, Mr. Ou Ratanak, and Mrs. Ly Vichuta for their inputs, and assisting with data collection and compilation. Particular thanks to key staff of Department of Biodiversity for their commitments and contributions to the whole preparation and updating of the NBSAP, especially Mr. Meng Monyrak, Mrs. Ken Bopreang, Mr. Seng Rathea, and Mr. Y ourk Sothearith for coordinating and facilitating the process of stocktaking and technical inputs from relevant stakeholders. There has also been direct support in providing information on ground activities, best practices, case studies, and biodiversity data from biodiversity specialists, academia, and conservation partners including Mr. Neang Thy, Mr. Khou Eanghourt, Mr. Chhang Phourin, Mr. Tan Setha and Mr. Uy Ching, the Royal University of Phnom Penh, Fauna and Flora International, the Wildlife Conservation Society, the World Wildlife Fund, and Birdlife

1 National Biodiversity Steering Committee has been invalidated by Subdecree Jll 59 dated 18 May 2015 and merged into National Council for Sustainable Development

vi

Page

v

International. Without the regular and effective involvement of these people, this document could not have been comprehensive and produced in time.

We acknowledge with thanks all the contributors and stakeholders from relevant ministries, international organizations, non-governmental organizations, local authorities and communities for their participation and technical input in the formal and informal consultation processes, National Consultation Workshops, and meetings toward the preparation and updating of this NBSAP.

We would like to convey our thanks to the Global Environment Facility (GEF) through the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the USAID funded Harvest Program (Mr. Matt Maltby) for financial and technical supports towards the revision and updating of the NBSAP. Without the great support of many partners it would have been difficult to complete the revision of the Cambodia's National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan.

We would also like to thank the members of the Secretariat of the NBSC and all staffs of Department of Biodiversity for their commitments, patience, hard and active work that led to the successful updating of the NBSAP. Finally, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to all the experts for their valuable time and efforts in providing useful ideas and feedback during the preparation and updating process of National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan to support Cambodia's commitment to implement the three pillar objectives of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity.

Phnom Penh, 26 January 2016

H.E Somaly CHAN Project Director, and Deputy Secretary General National Council for Sustainable Development/ Ministry of Environment

vii

National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC)

H.E Say Samal

Minister, Ministry of Environment Chair

H.E Ty Sokun

Secretary of State, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Vice Chair

H.E Lu Sim Eam

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Rural Development Member

H.E Nuth Chansokha

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Planning Member

H.E Ly Chana

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Water Resources & Meteorology Member

H.E Top Sopheak

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Tourism Member

H.E Tun Lean

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Mines and Energy Member

H.E Nhem Saran

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Public Works and Transport Member

H.E Tauch Sarou

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport Member

H.E Koy Sodany

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Commerce Member

H.E Ly Chhoung

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Health Member

H.E Vong Sandap

Under Secretary of State, Ministry of Economy and Finance Member

H.E Te Navuth

Secretary General, Cambodia National Mekong Committee Member

H.E Heng Soknang

Deputy Secretary General, Council for the Development of Cambodia Member

H.E Say Socheat

Deputy Governor, Koh Kong Province Member

H.E Kim Chhaihieng

Deputy Governor, Siem Reap Province Member

H.E So Neak

Deputy Governor, Ratanakiri Province Member

viii

Technical Working Group on NBSAP Updating

H.E Ouk Seiha

Assistant to the Minister, Ministry of Environment

Chair

H.E Chan Somaly

Deputy Secretary General, National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD)

Vice Chair

Mr. Ung Sam Oeun

Deputy Director, Department of Administration, Planning and Finance, General Secretariat of

National Council for Sustainable Development Secretary

Mr. Kim Chantharith

Deputy Director, National Institute of Statistics of the Ministry of Planning Member

Mr. So Veasna

Deputy Director, Department of New and Renewable Energy, Ministry of Mines and Energy Member

Mr. Chheang Dany

Deputy Director, Department of Wildlife and Biodiversity, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Member

Mr. Thuch Phanhchaksokhavith

Deputy Chief of Office, Multilateral Cooperation 2, Ministry of Economy and Finance Member

Mr. Suon Sam Aun

Chief of Administration Office, Department of Water Resource Management and Conservation,

Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology Member

Mr. Ou Manira

Deputy Director, Department of Planning and Public Relations, Ministry of Rural Development Member

Mr. Bou Chan Serey

Deputy Director General, Ministry of Tourism Member

Mr. Choun Vanna

Vice Chief of Science Office, Department of Curriculum Development, Ministry of Education,

Youth and Sport

Member

xiii

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

ABS Access and Benefits Sharing ASAP Asian Species Action Partnership BCH Biosafety Clearing House

CBD Convention on Biological Diversity CBEA Cambodia Biodiversity Enabling Activity CBNRM Community-based natural resource management CCCSP Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014 - 2023 CCD Climate Change Department

CCTT Climate Change Technical Team CEPA Communication, Education and Public Awareness CHM Clearing-House Mechanism

CITES Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna CMDG Cambodia Millennium Development Goals

DEEC Department of Early Education and Care EIA Environmental Impact Assessment EFCMU Extension of the Forest Crime Monitoring Unit EMS Environmental Management Systems

FA Forestry Administration FiA Fisheries Administration FLEG Forest Law Enforcement and Governance GDM Green Development Mechanism GDANCP General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection GHG Greenhouse gas

GMO Genetically Modified Organisms GSSD General Secretariat for Sustainable Development IBA Important Bird Areas

IBSC Interministerial Biodiversity Steering Committee ICBD International Conventions and Biodiversity Department IMSCEE Inter-ministerial Steering Committee on Environmental Education IPM Integrated Pest Management

IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature KBA Key Biodiversity Areas

LDCF Least Developed Countries Fund LMAP Land Management and Administration Project LMO Living Modified Organism (resulting from modern biotechnology) MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

MCFA Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts MCR Ministry of Cults and Religion MEA Multilateral Environmental Agreement MEF Ministry of Economy and Finance MIH Ministry of Industry and Handicraft MIME Ministry of Industry, Mining and Energy, which is now MME MLMUPC Ministry of Land Management Urban Planning and Construction MME Ministry of Mine and Energy

MOC Ministry of Commerce

xiv

MOE Ministry of Environment MOEYS Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport MOH Ministry of Health

MOI Ministry of Interior MOINF Ministry of Information MOLVT Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training MOP Ministry of Planning

MOSVY Ministry of Social Affairs, Veteran and Youth Rehabilitation MOT Ministry of Tourism

MOWRAM Ministry of Water Resource and Meteorology MPWT Ministry of Public Works and Transport MRD Ministry of Rural Development MOWA Ministry of Women‟s Affairs NCCC National Climate Change Committee NCDM National Committee for Disaster Management NCSD National Council for Sustainable Development NFP National Forest Programme 2010 - 2029 NPASSMF National Protected Area System Strategic Management Framework NSDP National Strategic Development Plan

NSDS National Sustainable Development Strategy PES Payment for Ecosystem Services

PLUP Participatory Land Use Planning PRSP Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper REDD Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation RGC Royal Government of Cambodia

RUA Royal University of Agriculture RUPP Royal University of Phnom Penh SCCF Special Climate Change Fund SEA Strategic Environmental Assessment TK Traditional Knowledge

TSA Tonle Sap Authority TWG Technical Working Group UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

xv

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Background

Cambodia relies predominantly on its rich biodiversity and other natural resources for its socio‐economic development and for most people‟s food, livelihoods and well-being. In the past decades, high population growth and the increasing economic demands of this growing population have often led to the conversion of natural forests to agriculture, to land degradation and pollution caused by unsustainable agriculture and industries; they have led to habitat fragmentation from public works and urbanization; to the overharvesting and overexploitation of resources particularly in forests, freshwaters and marine and coastal areas. These pressures on biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services are often exacerbated by the impact of climate change and more frequent natural disasters.

Cambodia has taken a number of measures to reduce biodiversity loss, in particular the designation of a wide network of protected areas. However, limited financial resources and capacities in general, combined with poor awareness of the value and vulnerability of ecosystems (of which the natural capital is a part) have not allowed for an effective control of the drivers of biodiversity loss. This, of course, has detrimental consequences for the country‟s sustainable development.

In 1995, Cambodia acceded to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). As part of its fulfillment of the obligations under this Convention, Cambodia adopted its National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) in 2002, aiming to achieve "equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life through sustainable use, protection and management of biological resources". The 2002 Strategy emphasizes capacity-building, community involvement and intersectional cooperation.

Twelve years into the adoption of its NBSAP, Cambodia has noted progress in each of the 17 themes, under which 81 strategic objectives and associated indicators were identified, as well as 98 priority actions. Nevertheless, the overall impact of the NBSAP has been limited by inadequate human, financial and institutional capacities, combined with insufficient knowledge and awareness of the value of biodiversity, and an inadequate integration of biodiversity into policies and programmes dealing with sustainable development and poverty reduction in the country.

In decision X/2 (para (c)) adopted at its 10th meeting in 2010, the CBD Conference of the Parties urged Parties to review and, as appropriate, update and revise their NBSAPs in line with the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 adopted at that meeting, and with the guidance outlined in its decision IX/8. The Aichi Biodiversity Target 17 reiterated this request in stating that "by 2015, each Party has developed, adopted as a policy instrument, and has commenced implementing an effective, participatory and updated national biodiversity strategy and action plan."

Cambodia initiated its review process in July 2012 and completed it in December 2015 under the coordination of the General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection (GDANCP), the General Secretariat of National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD), and the Ministry of Environment (MOE). In order to ensure a truly participatory approach in the review process that would lead to the full ownership of the updated NBSAP and an effective engagement in the implementation of the NBSAP, an inter-ministerial technical working group was invited to participate actively in the consultations. This group consisted of representatives of 9 ministries and from other government entities, local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, the civil society and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) each having a role and responsibilities in environmental management in Cambodia.

An assessment of the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP and a Biodiversity Status Report were carried out to take stock of the achievements derived from the implementation of the NBSAP, and to identify obstacles, opportunities, as well as the country‟s weaknesses and strengths in the implementation of the NBSAP. These findings constitute important elements to be taken into consideration in updating the NBSAP. In addition, laws, strategies and plans relating to biodiversity and sustainable development adopted by Cambodia since 2002 were reviewed so as to ensure harmony, coherence, complementarity and synergy between the updated NBSAP and all these approaches, strategies and plans, and to align with the national development goals and priorities.

xvi

Vision and mission

Cambodia‟s vision for biodiversity is that, through this updated NBSAP and in support of the National Strategic Development Plan, by 2050, Cambodia‟s biodiversity and its ecosystem services are valued, conserved, restored where necessary, wisely used and managed so as to ensure equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life for all in the country. The roadmap or mission for achieving this vision consists of using, protecting and managing biodiversity for sustainable development in Cambodia. This implies that biodiversity issues and values are mainstreamed into national development and sectoral policies, plans and programmes; that biodiversity, our natural capital, is protected by reducing the various direct and indirect pressures causing its loss or degradation, that it is used wisely so as to enhance the benefits derived from it to the people of Cambodia, particularly in rural areas; and that an enabling environment for the effective and efficient implementation of this mission is strengthened.

Framework strategic objectives and key actions

Cambodia adopted the following four overall strategic objectives for the realization of its NBSAP‟s vision and mission:

Strategic objective A: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about genetic resources, species, habitats or ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable development and poverty eradication in Cambodia, as a priority for conservation and sustainable use;

Strategic objective B: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s priority biodiversity components; and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures;

Strategic objective C: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia from biodiversity and associated ecosystem services, for an equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life;

Strategic objective D: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the strategy.

Thirty-seven generic actions were identified for the achievement of the above overall strategic objectives with the respective responsible Ministries, and other participating Ministries and agencies identified.

Through these strategic objectives and key actions, Cambodia decided to:

(a) Adopt a step-by-step approach, taking into account the limited financial and human resources available, focusing initially on components of biodiversity that are important for sustainable development and poverty reduction, and those that are currently in danger of disappearance or irreversible degradation, or that could be subject to high risks in the near future. Knowledge about these priority components of biodiversity needs to be generated, compiled and included in education curricula. It needs to be disseminated in the media and taken into consideration in the government‟s discussions on laws, budgets, programmes and strategies, and it needs to be integrated into wider development programmes and strategies and in all the sectors;

(b) Not only focus measures on the state of biodiversity, such as protected areas and programmes targeted at particular threatened or vulnerable species, or control direct drivers of biodiversity loss, but also focus on addressing the underlying causes of biodiversity loss. It will be possible to take the most appropriate measures to avert loss or degradation of biodiversity only when adequate information on the pressures and their impacts is available. Other important focus areas include: participatory planning; the involvement of all groups of stakeholders including local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities in the spirit of decentralization to the lowest appropriate level for greater efficiency, effectiveness and equity engrained in the Rectangular Strategy; adaptive, effective and equitable management; and the use of the ecosystem approach and ecosystem or landscape-based approaches, biodiversity-inclusive strategic environmental assessments and environmental impact assessments, and guidelines for the sustainable use of biodiversity, such as the Addis Ababa Principles and Guidelines for the Sustainable Use of Biodiversity or the FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible Fisheries, will characterize all the measures taken for the

xvii protection of biological resources, the recovery of threatened species, restoration of degraded ecosystems important for people‟s lives, and sustainable agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries, forestry, landscape management, public works and industrial development;

(c) Highlight, as often as possible, success stories from measures taken, emphasizing in particular the supply of essential services, including services related to water, health, food security, climate change adaptation, resistance and resilience to land degradation or natural disasters and, in general, services related to livelihoods and the well-being of all in Cambodia. In doing so, awareness about the benefits from measures taken will be increased and will support biodiversity conservation and sustainable use;

(d) Explore incentives put forward in various other strategies such as the National Green Growth Roadmap adopted in 2009 and the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization (ratified in 2015). These positive incentives will sustain conservation and sustainable use initiatives by contributing to the change in attitudes and behaviors of people towards biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services;

(e) Consider sustainable financing of the NBSAP as one of the priorities, so as to address the lack of financial resources, which is one of the key constraints identified during the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP;

(f) Address the needs for enhanced financial, human, institutional capacities as cutting across many strategies, plans and sectors in a coordinated manner for efficiency. In this perspective and in line with the recommendations from the National Capacity Self-Assessment, Cambodia intends to (i) mainstream biodiversity considerations in the on-the-ground implementation of all the relevant policies, strategies, plans and programmes already adopted, and more specifically by integrating biodiversity into key economic development sectors, into development planning, policy and legal reforms beyond environment; and (ii) address biodiversity, due to its complexity and wide scope, using interdisciplinary, cross-sectoral and multi-scale approaches.

These strategic objectives and choices are in line with the strategic goals of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and support the development goals adopted by the Royal Government of Cambodia in the Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in Cambodia. These strategic objectives and choices are also in line with the provisions in the National Strategic Development Plan 2009-2013 and the National Green Growth Roadmap 2013-2030. The implementation of these strategic objectives is expected to meet most of the environmental quality objectives proposed in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (2009), such as productive land resources, rich forest resources, high quality ground‐ and surface water resources, rich fish resources, functional wetlands, sustainable marine‐ and coastal environment, rich biodiversity, limited influence on the climate, efficient use of natural resources, limited waste generation, limited impact from natural disasters, and clean air.

Implementation of the 2002 NBSAP: lessons learned and outcomes

The 2002 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan proposed a series of strategic objectives and priority actions that were addressed under 17 themes corresponding to important sectors in Cambodia. Overall, there has been good progress in the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP, but that has been limited mainly by insufficient knowledge of the status, trends and future dynamic of biodiversity components and ecosystem services; limited quantitative knowledge of the value of biodiversity in Cambodia and of the various anthropogenic pressures; by the fact that most of the research activities were externally driven; and insufficient financial resources. These and many other constraints encountered during the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP are addressed in the updated NBSAP.

Status of biodiversity in Cambodia

The national biodiversity status assessment was undertaken to describe the status and trends of Cambodia‟s biodiversity. However, due to the time and resources available, only an overview was possible. The assessment highlighted significant gaps in data and coordination, as well as the strength for

xviii

future assessments such as the RUPP Masters in Conservation, Centre for Biodiversity Conservation and the Cambodian Journal of Natural History, with the support of the national clearing-house mechanism.

No systematic assessment of plant and animal genetic resources was carried out before or after the adoption of the NBSAP in 2002. There is now a positive trend toward an increased understanding of genetic diversity and the importance for conservation, but there is still limited use for domestic and commercial plants and animals. Recently, DNA was used for crocodile and elephant research.

The recent inventory in Cambodia indicates a diversity of 162 mammal species across both terrestrial and marine systems, 601 bird species with 7 on the new global Evolutionally Distinct and Globally Endangered (EDGE) list, 1357 fish species across both fresh and salt water systems, 173 reptile species, 72 amphibian species, 671 invertebrates, and 3113 plant species. The observed trend in diminishing fish species diversity is a result of unsustainable harvest; and this drop in fish species diversity is likely to become exacerbated by the increased damming of the Mekong and its tributaries. Regarding species diversity, the general trend shows an increasing understanding of species diversity, where the most significant gaps in knowledge center around amphibian and plant species. Ongoing studies also identify potential extinctions. In terms of ecosystem diversity, the overall trend indicates a shift toward an increased human use of ecosystems; that is increasing agricultural, commercial and extractive use. The Ministry of Environment has started to highlight ecosystems and their services, but more work is needed especially regarding vulnerable ecosystems.

National actions for implementing the overall objectives of the NBSAP: thematic approach and national biodiversity targets

Thematic approach

Similarly to the 2002 NBSAP, a sectoral approach was used to identify the priority actions required for achieving the vision, mission and overall strategic objectives of this updated NBSAP under the following themes: the 17 themes in the 2002 NBSAP and the new themes on (i) mining, (ii) access and benefit-sharing, (iii) customary sustainable use and traditional knowledge, (iv) manufacturing industries, (v) resource mobilization, (vi) landscape and seascape management and (vii) clearing-house mechanism for technical and scientific cooperation. The 24 themes were regrouped under (i) Protection of biodiversity: themes 1 to 8 (Group 1); (ii) Sustainable use of biodiversity: themes 9 to 16 (Group 2); and (iii) Enabling environment: themes 17 to 24 (Group 3).

Each theme is introduced with an account of: the issues taken into consideration in the 2002 NBSAP, a brief overview of the results of the actions identified in that NBSAP, followed by a list of current key issues based essentially on the findings in the Fifth National Report, the assessment of the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP, and the Biodiversity Status Report. Additional sources of issues include national reports and communications prepared under the other Rio conventions and other biodiversity-related multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs), and various reports on the implementation of relevant national strategies and plans, such as the report on the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals and reports submitted to funding agencies.

The overall strategic objectives and key actions were used as checklists to develop strategic objectives and identify key actions under these thematic strategic objectives. The overall strategic objectives and key actions will also serve as checklists whenever a new ecosystem (e.g., urban ecosystem) or a specific landscape/seascape (e.g., the socio-ecological production landscapes and seascapes under the Satoyama Initiative) is found important for inclusion as a new theme in the NBSAP. A list of leading and participating ministries and agencies is provided along with each action. Complementarities and possible synergies with actions from other themes and possible links to the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets are highlighted to ensure efficiency during the implementation of each action and avoid unnecessary duplications.

Theme 1: Protected area system

Cambodia's protected area system (currently 26% of the country‟s land-which is beyond the 17% terrestrial coverage of the Aichi biodiversity target) has a great potential to become a major contributor to the country's economy and sustainable development, including poverty reduction, through the conservation and sustainable use of its biological, natural and cultural resources and other ecosystem services. However, Cambodia‟s protected area system is under a lot of pressure. The majority of the

xix

designated protected areas and conservation areas are ineffective and there are obstacles to the establishment of new protected areas and conservation areas where they are required.

Under this theme, the goals of the strategic objectives and key actions are to (i) generate information on species ranges, status and trends; on the value, role, status and functioning of protected areas under MOE, and of conservation areas under MAFF, and their network, and compile information in user-friendly databases; (ii) ensure that Cambodia implements its biodiversity conservation commitments under the MEAs (in particular the CBD, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, the World Heritage Convention and the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands). These commitments are reiterated in the plan of action on protected areas in this NBSAP, and its targets in the Cambodia Millennium Development Goals, the National Forest Programme Strategy and other strategic documents; (iii) implement well-coordinated measures for the effective protection of natural habitats and vulnerable ecosystems, including in particular coral reefs, Important Bird Areas (IBAs) and Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs), while deriving environmental and socioeconomic benefits; the protection of areas that are naturally resilient to climate change and could thus serve as climate refugia; the protection and recovery of threatened species; and the sustainable use of biological resources within protected areas and conservation areas; and (iv) implement the 2008 Protected Area Law and related laws.

The success in implementing the strategic objectives and key actions under this theme and all the following themes depends greatly on the enabling conditions and how the country will strengthen its capability and engagement.

Theme 2: Threatened species

The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme will focus on the need to (i) identify species of fauna and flora that are threatened, and on improving knowledge about their status and trends, as well as the threats and socioeconomic consequences of losing these species, (ii) describe the status and trends of species vulnerability in the face of climate change. They will also provide some guidance on ways and means to improve the status of threatened species, including through the establishment of in-situ conservation facilities (see theme 1); rescue, recovery and reintroduction programmes; the rehabilitation and restoration of degraded habitats; and the prevention and control of invasive alien species.

Theme 3: Ex-situ conservation

The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme were put forward to develop and strengthen ex-situ conservation facilities, such as herbariums, and botanical and zoological gardens also devoted to research and training, in complementarity with in-situ conservation measures under the previous themes.

Theme 4: Sustainable mining

Mining is a sector with great economic potential in Cambodia. When managed effectively and properly, it can significantly contribute to poverty reduction and assist in meeting the country‟s development goals. However, currently many mining operations are destroying natural ecosystems and are creating water pollution that is having severe impacts on downstream watercourses and the surrounding communities. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme were put forward to develop mining into a sustainable sector, one that is keeping in line with the mining law and the 2030 vision of the National Sustainable Development Strategy (NSDS). Based on the NSDS 2030 vision, mining should be a sector that exploits minerals without destroying nearby human settlements and landscapes, and without causing serious health and environmental impacts. It should be a sector that economizes the scarce mineral resources and promotes the recycling of metals. Strategically, the ecological and socioeconomic impact of mineral resource exploration, extraction and processing on the status and trends of biodiversity components and functions will be assessed; awareness about this impact will be enhanced; preventive and corrective measures, including ecosystem restoration, will be developed and applied, as appropriate; and the contribution of mining resources to biodiversity conservation, poverty reduction, sustainable development and the well-being of all in Cambodia will be increased.

Theme 5: Environmental security

The presence of land mines does not allow for the establishment of legal conservation programmes in those insecure mined zones. In addition, natural disasters (in particular floods) cause serious damage to infrastructure and ecosystems, especially agro-ecosystems. They disrupt social and economic activities.

xx

Strategic objectives and key actions under this theme will allow the gathering of relevant information and data, on the basis of which preventive, proactive and corrective measures will be designed and applied.

Theme 6: Sustainable land-use planning

The key to successful projects and programmes is planning. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme include (i) the inventory of ongoing land-use planning activities, (ii) an assessment of their effectiveness, and (iii) the development of a national land-use master plan, and provincial and community-based land-use plans based essentially on the identification of areas where land-use planning is needed to ensure conservation of biodiversity, the sustainable use of its components, and contribution to sustainable development and poverty eradication. The experiences accumulated in the country and elsewhere will provide a basis for the development of guidelines for land-use planning, building on the ecosystem approach and similar approaches, so as to optimize the use of the resources found in the country and their social, environmental and economic benefits.

Theme 7: Sustainable water resources

Water resources are an essential component of the nation‟s environment and natural resource base. A long dry season and pollution from various sources limit the amount and quality of water available for human consumption, agriculture and other uses, and aquatic life. This theme is about managing waters in a sustainable manner, in line with the 2007 Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of Cambodia and related sub-decrees. This theme is also in harmony with the NSDS 2030 vision regarding sustainable supply of water, by applying measures that will maintain water resources quality and quantity suitable for human consumption, and for use in agriculture, livestock and industries, and by reducing the effects of flooding and droughts on water supply and quality through a combination of preventive and adaptation measures.

Theme 8: Biodiversity and climate change

Cambodia is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change in Southeast Asia, owing to its high dependency on climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture, water resources, forestry, fisheries and tourism; all of which form the foundation of its economic growth and support the livelihoods of a great majority of its population. Climate change is one of the most important drivers of biodiversity loss in the country; for this reason biodiversity conservation and sustainable use can contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigation. Strategic objectives and key actions under this theme aim to (i) assess the present and projected impact of climate change and climate change mitigation or adaptation measures on genetic resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services, and on sectors depending primarily on biodiversity in particular agriculture, fisheries and livestock. Measures taken include the creation, expansion and restoration of effectively managed protected areas (see Theme 1 above); (ii) assess and document the role of biodiversity in climate change mitigation and adaptation measures, and strengthen biodiversity conservation measures that have a positive impact on climate change mitigation and adaptation; and (iii) minimize the anthropogenic pressures (such as pollution, exploitation and sedimentation) on ecosystems that are vulnerable to climate change, so as to maintain their integrity, functioning and resilience.

Theme 9: Sustainable forestry

Cambodia has one of the highest levels of forest cover in Southeast Asia. Forest ecosystems support biodiversity and provide countless services, resources and functions that are important for the livelihoods and wellbeing of the people in Cambodia, as well as for wildlife, for Cambodia‟s economy, and for mitigating climate change. Sustainable forest management characterizes the management of socioecological production landscapes in the country. There is a general concern over the human impact on forest health and on the natural processes of forest growth and regeneration; human activities of particular concern include illegal logging activities and inappropriate forest sub‐product collection, including land clearing for agriculture and ownership. Under this theme, the strategic objectives and key actions are about (i) identifying, making inventory, monitoring and enhancing awareness about forest genetic resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable development and poverty eradication in Cambodia; (ii) assessing the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s forest resources and forest functions; and applying, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures, taking into account the 2002 Law on Forestry; and (iii) strengthening measures that have a positive impact on forest biodiversity and that enhance the

xxi

benefits from forest resources and, in general, forest ecosystems, for all in Cambodia, in line with the NSDS 2030 vision for forests.

Theme 10: Sustainable freshwater fisheries and aquaculture

Fisheries play a significant role in supplying Cambodians with food, as well as in supporting the national economy. Fisheries, however, are subject to a significant amount of anthropogenic pressure that is leading to a decline in fish stocks and in the size of fish caught. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme are about (i) identifying, taking inventory, monitoring and enhancing awareness about freshwater resources including fish varieties used in aquaculture; (ii) developing and implementing management plans containing preventive and corrective measures to address the major direct and indirect factors and processes that are impacting Cambodia‟s freshwater fisheries and aquaculture negatively, while enforcing the 2006 Law on Fisheries, developing post-harvest fish processing, and promoting national and export markets for harvested and processed fish; and (iii) maintaining or strengthening measures that have a positive impact on freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, so as to enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia.

Theme 11: Sustainable coastal and marine resources management

The coastal and marine area of Cambodia is ecologically and biologically rich, but under a lot of pressure. Strategically, key actions under this theme aim to (i) monitor and gather information for awareness-raising on coastal and marine resources; and (ii) develop management plans containing preventive and corrective measures to control identified direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s coastal and marine resources, and measures that will sustain benefits from the effective management of coastal and marine resources.

Theme 12: Sustainable animal wildlife resources management

Cambodia is host to a great diversity of animal life of significant importance in the lives of the people and for the functioning of ecosystems. Reports indicate that Cambodia is losing its unique and valuable wildlife genetic pool. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme include (i) identifying, taking inventory, monitoring and enhancing awareness about animal wildlife resources; (ii) strengthening taxonomic and ecological work including on invasive alien animal species and (iii) applying preventive and corrective measures based on identified direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s animal wildlife resources.

Theme 13: Sustainable agriculture and animal production

Cambodia‟s economy is largely based on agriculture; with livestock production on an increase. In order to respond to the high and ever-increasing food demands, while avoiding further conversion of forestland to agriculture, the country needs to take environmentally friendly measures to increase agricultural productivity and efficiency, food processing and marketing. This needs to be done in line with the laws, strategies and plans adopted since 2002 relating to agriculture and animal production, and more specifically to the unmet 2015 targets contained in the 2009 NSDS. It is therefore necessary, under this theme, to strategically (i) identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about agricultural biodiversity, including the animal component; (ii) apply preventive and corrective measures by addressing the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s agricultural biodiversity, as well as its agricultural and animal production. In order to achieve this, the agricultural sector needs to be broadened to thereby attract more quality investments in agri-business and improve agricultural trade linkages, land reform, agricultural diversification and agro-processing; and (iii) strengthen measures that have a positive impact on agriculture and animal production, and thus ensure food security for all, particularly for the rural community.

Theme 14: Sustainable Energy Resources Management

Over 84% of Cambodian households meet their energy needs through fuelwood, which accounts for approximately 70% of the total national energy demand. The domestic use of fuelwood and charcoal commonly requires heavy forest logging, which generates indoor/outdoor air pollution and creates severe environmental problems. Energy supply in Cambodia also relies heavily on imported fuels. The country is exploring new sources of energy, including hydropower, offshore and onshore oil and gas, and renewable energy to respond to the increasing energy demand. Under this theme, the following key strategic actions have been identified to (i) assess the energy needs, and launch inventory and monitoring programmes for

xxii

energy biomass, (ii) enhance awareness about the contribution of biodiversity to the country‟s energy needs, and (iii) identify and apply ways and means to increase this contribution in a sustainable way, while reducing the impacts of energy production and consumption on biodiversity components, as well as on local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities.

Theme 15: Access and Benefit-Sharing

Cambodia signed the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity in 2012, and translated it into Khmer language. The country became Party in April 2015. Under this theme, the key actions are articulated around the strategic objectives of developing and implementing national access and benefits-sharing (ABS) policy and legislation, and strengthening relevant communication, education and public awareness programmes.

Theme 14: Customary sustainable use and traditional knowledge

For centuries, indigenous peoples and local communities have accumulated substantial knowledge relevant to sustainable resource use and management, and to the conservation of biodiversity in their traditional territories. They have been able to adapt this knowledge to changes in environmental, social, economic and political conditions, as needed, and within the ecosystem limits. Indigenous peoples and local communities are therefore well placed to adapt to changing conditions such as climate change, and to contribute to strengthening the resilience of the social and ecological systems, as well as the generation of new knowledge. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme aim to (i) ensure that biodiversity customary sustainable use practices and traditional knowledge are valued, respected, protected and considered as useful and necessary for the implementation of the NBSAP; (ii) support and strengthen community-based initiatives that contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity; and (iii) ensure that traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use of biodiversity are applied with the active involvement and effective participation of relevant indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities.

Theme 17: Industry, Technology and Services

This theme consists of three sub-themes: (i) Sustainable manufacturing industry management, (ii) Biotechnology and biosafety, and (iii) Sustainable tourism.

(a) Strategic objectives and key actions for the manufacturing industry are about (i) assessing the impact of manufacturing industries on components of biodiversity and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia; and (ii) preventing and, as needed, reducing possible negative impacts of manufacturing industries on Cambodia‟s important biodiversity components, taking into account the products‟ life cycles and possible restoration measures;

(b) Strategic objectives and key actions for biotechnology and biosafety were articulated around the National Action Plan on Biosafety and Biotechnology developed in 2008 under the CBD,

in the context of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety and its Strategic Plan, having in mind

that these activities have to contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia;

(c) Strategic objectives and key actions for tourism aim to (i) gather biodiversity information of relevance to tourism development, including taking inventory of nature based-tourism sites; (ii) prevent tourism activities from impacting biodiversity negatively and, as needed, apply corrective measures where tourism has a negative impact on Cambodia‟s important biodiversity components, and (iii) strengthen measures relating to tourism that have a positive impact on biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia from biodiversity and associated ecosystem services.

Theme 18: Resource mobilization

This theme is about strategic ways and means to mobilize resources needed to advance the conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components, so as to achieve sustainable development, poverty reduction and the well-being of the people in Cambodia. Resource mobilization includes the building or strengthening of human capacities, mobilization of financial resources from diverse sources including GEF, the strengthening and enhanced coordination of institutions, acquisition and use of new

xxiii

technologies, introduction of positive economic incentives, enhanced engagement of the business sector and other stakeholders, and equitable sharing of benefits from the utilization of genetic resources. Building on various ongoing initiatives such as the implementation of recommendations from the National Capacity Self-Assessment (NCSA) report or the development of a biodiversity strategy for resource mobilization under the CBD, resource mobilization is essential for enabling the implementation of all the actions identified in the NBSAP.

Theme 19:Community participation

Community participation implies the regular involvement of members of the communities in natural resources planning, decision- and policy-making, implementation, monitoring and reporting processes through multi-stakeholder consultations. More specifically, the success in implementing conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and ecosystem services will require the effective participation of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities who depend directly on biodiversity. The strategic objective under this theme is about putting in place ways and means to enhance effective and efficient community participation in natural resource management including by building environmental awareness, understanding and empowerment, particularly in rural communities, and by ensuring that legal and institutional frameworks support communities' rights to use and protect their resources.

Theme 20: Awareness, education, and research coordination and development

This theme is another critical element of the enabling cluster and as such it constitutes a key component of every theme. Increasing public awareness and the understanding of the importance of biodiversity, as well as acquiring expertise and know-how are essential elements in guaranteeing the effectiveness of the measures to achieve the conservation and sustainable use of the natural capital sustaining life and human well-being in Cambodia. To be efficient, awareness and education activities have to be supported by adequate scientific research and documentation. For efficiency and enhanced synergy, and in the framework of the ecosystem approach or similar approaches, research being carried out by various bodies within the government, by knowledge institutions and non-governmental organisations needs coordination to take full advantage of complementarities and synergies.

Theme 21: Legislation and institutional structure

Since 2002, Cambodia has passed several new laws and sub-decrees and ratified international and regional agreements of great relevance to biodiversity. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme focus on (i) promoting an effective, coherent and synergistic implementation of policies and legislations relating to biodiversity. This will be achieved through the support of an effective national clearing-house mechanism and through the strengthening of the National Biodiversity Steering Committee and other interministerial structures established in accordance with the various laws and policies that govern directly or indirectly the conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and ecosystems; (ii) strengthening existing national and regional institutions addressing biodiversity issues through financial support, capacity building and public awareness programmes, so as to ensure an effective enforcement of the laws and guarantee mutual reinforcement and a more efficient use of the available resources; and (iii) establishing and supporting new institutions such as for the implementation of the Nagoya Protocol, and the acquisition and adaptation of technology of relevance to biodiversity conservation and sustainable use.

Theme 22: Quality of life and poverty reduction

Cambodia has been addressing poverty reduction and improvement of the quality of life both at the policy and macro-economic levels and at the level of direct interventions focused on the poorest populations in rural areas. The strategies adopted are typically social and economic responses; however, they need to be developed to take biodiversity considerations into account. Under this theme, only the role of biodiversity is considered. Biodiversity is essential for human well-being through ecosystem provisioning, regulating, cultural and supporting services. The strategic objectives and key actions under this theme focus on (i) enhancing the contribution of biodiversity conservation, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilisation of genetic resources to poverty reduction and the Cambodia Millennium/Sustainable Development Goals; (ii) strengthening the enabling environment for the implementation of biodiversity actions that will enhance the quality of life for all in Cambodia and contribute to poverty reduction; and (iii) ensuring that the social and infrastructural changes being made to improve the lives of people in Cambodia and economic growth have no detrimental impacts in the long

xxiv

term on biodiversity and the rural communities. Actions considered under all the themes of this strategy will contribute to the achievement of poverty reduction and to the maintenance of a high quality of life in Cambodia.

Theme 23: Landscape and seascape management and coordination

The ecosystem approach, under the CBD, is the primary framework for the management of biodiversity. Since the definition of „ecosystem approach‟ does not specify any particular spatial unit or scale, some organizations have put forward other approaches in line with the ecosystem approach, such as the landscape approach, that are more familiar to people working on the ground. The Interministerial Technical Working Group decided to include this theme in the national biodiversity strategy to ensure that the complexity of biodiversity management, the interactions among habitats within landscapes/seascapes and the many interests from various stakeholders are taken into consideration and are well coordinated for efficiency and synergistic conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity components. An illustration of the objectives and actions planned under this theme can be found in the management of socio-ecological production landscapes within the Satoyama initiative.

Theme 24: Clearing-house mechanism for technical and scientific cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange

Limited relevant information for policy and decision-making, the difficult accessibility when information is available, and the limited capability of the existing national clearing-house mechanism have led to the development of strategic objectives and key actions that would (i) improve access to and generate information, including in Khmer language; (ii) improve the use of available information and knowledge; and (iii) increase availability of financial, technical and human resources for the clearing-house mechanism.

Cambodia Biodiversity 2015-2020 Targets

Cambodia‟s updated NBSAP consists of 498 key actions identified to achieve 78 strategic objectives under 24 themes. It is necessary to implement these actions to realize the vision of this NBSAP. With a view to streamlining the NBSAP implementation, the Interministerial Technical Working Group defined 20 specific and time-bound targets, some of which are also measurable, to be achieved before or by 2020. Specific actions, essentially drawn from the key actions under the NBSAP themes, are listed as well as indicators of progress towards the achievement of each target. Many of the actions have already been adopted as part of strategies and plans for sustainable development and various sectoral plans and programmes. In addition, linkages between targets are highlighted so that implementation can be as efficient as possible.

The Cambodia Biodiversity 2015-2020 Targets can therefore be seen as a platform that will promote coherence, coordination, cooperation, co-evolution and synergy while maximizing resource use and efficiency in implementing the key actions. The targets will facilitate, in particular, cooperation and creation of concrete collaborative programmes between different Ministries and their Departments, different actors within and across economic sectors, and among organizations at the national, regional and international levels.

Cambodia Biodiversity 2015-2020 Targets are:

x Target 1 (Aichi Target 1): By 2020, every Cambodian is conscious about the environmental, economic, health, social and cultural value of the services derived from ecosystems, and integrates this knowledge in the way they deal with these ecosystems and resources;

x Target 2 (Aichi Target 20): By 2020, at the latest, the national budget allocation for biodiversity conservation and sustainable use (including NBSAP implementation) has increased by 20% through the development and implementation of a resource mobilization strategy;

x Target 3 (Aichi Target 2): By 2020, at the latest, biodiversity values have been integrated into national and sub-national development and poverty reduction strategies and planning processes;

x Target 4 (Aichi Target 6): By 2020, freshwater fisheries and aquaculture are managed sustainably by addressing their constraints, and by reducing and preventing their possible negative impact on fish stocks and on aquatic threatened species and vulnerable ecosystems;

xxv x Target 5 (Aichi Target 7): By 2020 the majority of areas under agriculture, animal production, aquaculture and forestry are managed sustainably;

x Target 6 (Aichi Target 14): By 2020, 10% of the protected areas, conservation areas, agro-ecosystems and forest ecosystems including mangroves, that have been under a lot of pressures in recent years are in an advanced state of restoration and are providing enhanced services, particularly to women, elders and children in local communities and indigenous ethnic minority groups;

x Target 7 (Aichi Target 4): By 2020, the Government, the private sector and other stakeholders have taken steps to reduce the negative impacts on ecosystems and their services caused by unsustainable production and consumption activities;

x Target 8 (Aichi Target 11): In 2020, at the latest, existing protected areas and conservation areas, including community-based natural resource management areas, have management plans and have started effective implementation.

By 2020,

(i) The coverage of marine and coastal protected areas and freshwater protected areas has at least doubled as compared to the 2010 levels;

(ii) Currently the unprotected areas of particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services that are under a lot of to pressures from human activities are identified and integrated in the protected area system; and

(iii) Protected areas and conservation areas have been valued, are part of a well-connected protected area system and have been integrated in national sustainable development goals and national green growth strategies, plans and programmes;

By 2029, protected forest covers 3.0 million hectares, in line with the objectives of the National Forest Programme 2010-2029;

x Target 9 (Aichi Target 3): By 2020, Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) is used throughout the country as an incentive for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity;

x Target 10 (Aichi Target 12): By 2020, all species of fauna and flora threatened at the national level have been identified and their status has been improved significantly as a result of applying measures to address their respective threats;

x Target 11 (Aichi Target 15): By 2020, ecosystem resilience and the contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks have been enhanced through the conservation and restoration of degraded ecosystems, focusing in particular on degraded forests, protected areas and conservation areas, thereby contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to combating desertification;

x Target 12 (Aichi Target 5): By 2020, the rate of loss of natural forests, coral reefs and other natural habitats is at least halved; and habitat degradation and fragmentation, pollution, overharvesting, introduction of invasive alien species and their impacts are significantly reduced;

x Target 13 (Aichi Target 16): By 2015, Cambodia has designated a national focal point and one or more competent national authorities for the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization (ABS), and established a functional ABS Clearing-House as part of the clearing-house mechanism;

By 2020, Cambodia has developed and is enforcing a legislation and national policies on access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilization;

x Target 14 (Aichi Target 17): By 2015, the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) have been updated and adopted, and have commenced to be implemented effectively;

x Target 15 (Aichi Target 10): By 2020, anthropogenic pressures (pollution, exploitation, sedimentation…) on coral reefs and vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate change have been significantly reduced;

xxvi x Target 16 (Aichi Target 8): By 2020, pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems are substantially reduced to levels that are not detrimental to ecosystem function and biodiversity;

x Target 17 (Aichi Target 18): By 2020, the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and their customary use of biological resources, are:

(a) respected, subject to national legislation and relevant international obligations, and (b) fully integrated and reflected in the implementation of the Convention and the NBSAP, with the full and effective participation of these communities at all relevant levels;

x Target 18 (Aichi Target 9): By 2020, major invasive alien species (IAS) and their pathways have been identified and prioritized, and prioritized IAS and pathways are controlled;

x Target 19 (Aichi Target 19): By 2020, an interoperable and user-friendly information system containing data and information on biodiversity (including its associated ecosystem services) values, functions, status and trends, and threats, and the consequences of its loss has been established and maintained in the responsible institutions for wide sharing among stakeholders;

x Target 20 (Aichi Target 13): By 2020, the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals, as well as the genetic diversity of their wild relatives is protected and conserved in-situ and ex-situ.

Monitoring, evaluation and reporting

Monitoring and evaluation are critical components of the NBSAP and are useful in reporting on implementation progress and the outcomes of measures taken. In addition, monitoring and evaluation allow an adaptive management capability to be mainstreamed in the strategy and ensure the flexible nature that characterizes effective and efficient NBSAPs. While monitoring should be a continuous process, so that it can detect unexpected changes requiring urgent attention, reporting can be done annually and, necessarily, in response to the obligations already agreed upon by Cambodia, such as the submission of national reports under the MEAs or obligations vis-a-vis a funding agency. Agreed sets of indicators and baselines, and a common timetable for reporting, building on ongoing initiatives in the relevant ministries and sectors, are essential for promoting coordinated monitoring and evaluation of the NBSAP implementation.

Monitoring, evaluation and reporting require the establishment and strengthening of relevant institutional and technological capacities, and adequate human and financial resources.

Support mechanisms for implementation

According to Aichi Biodiversity Target 17, updated NBSAPs have to be adopted as a policy instrument, by the government as a whole and for all the sectors, and their implementation should start effectively and in a participatory manner by 2015.

Ministry of Environment and the National Biodiversity Steering Committee2

As a starting point in the implementation of the NBSAP, MOE will mandate and support the National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC), serving as the steering committee for the NBSAP, to work on clarifying ministerial jurisdictions and the roles and responsibilities of various institutional actors. This exercise will identify ways and means to reduce responsibility overlaps, while promoting coordination, collaboration and synergy in an ecosystem approach or landscape / seascape perspective. The NBSC will describe, in concrete details, its strategy for promoting the engagement of stakeholders, including local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, civil society and non-governmental organisations, and for its coordinating, monitoring, reviewing and reporting roles.

The MOE and line Ministries have a facilitating and implementing role. Strategically, MOE, as the coordinator of the NBSAP, will develop and implement a communication and outreach strategy to raise

2 National Biodiversity Steering Committee has been invalidated by Subdecree N0 59 dated 18 May 2015 and merged into National Council for Sustainable Development

xxvii

awareness and preparedness about the NBSAP, and to promote wide participation and enhance the participation of all groups of stakeholders, including by emphasizing the win-win situations in which such participation would result.

The MOE will also provide the clearing-house mechanism, hosted in the Ministry, with additional resources to enhance the mobilization and storage of relevant data from all sources, including data generated under the Rio Conventions, biodiversity-related conventions, and sectors that use components of biodiversity or impact biodiversity. Accessibility will be made as user-friendly as needed to encourage a wide use of the clearing-house mechanism and to catalyze improved well-informed decision-making. As a prerequisite, the clearing-house mechanism should be made sufficiently interactive and interoperable with other databases in the country. It should be easily accessible to stakeholders outside of the environment sector to input and manage their own data. The international community and international investors increasingly require transparent and accurate information.

In order to achieve the targets and implement the NBSAP, many actions will have to be carried out at the local level. The development of Local Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans and more specific site relevant targets will be encouraged and supported.

Group 3 themes in this NBSAP consist of strategies and actions that are meant to enhance and maintain favorable conditions to enable the implementation of the NBSAP and the achievement of the targets. Awareness-raising and resource mobilization were identified as priorities. Limited financial resources were found to be one of the most critical obstacles to the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP. The mobilization of financial resources is thus essential for operationalizing the updated NBSAP and achieving the associated targets. A diversified source of financing is recommended including in particular a strong engagement of the business sector. As a matter of urgency, Cambodia will develop, as soon as the NBSAP is approved, its biodiversity portfolio for GEF6 building on its experience with GEF5. Not only the ten GEF6 programmes will be considered, but also the biodiversity focal area set-aside funds (FAS) for implementing enabling activities and GEF funds under the other focal areas.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Cambodia is predominantly dependent on its rich biodiversity and other natural resources for its socio‐ economic development. However, various factors exert increasing pressures on these resources. These factors include, as noted in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (2009): high population growth and increasing economic demands; land degradation; habitat fragmentation from public works; overexploitation of resources in particular in forests, freshwaters and marine and coastal areas; pollution from unsustainable agriculture and industries; and natural disasters. Following the adoption of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992, the world community has increased efforts to reduce the loss of genetic resources, species of fauna and flora, and natural ecosystems.

The Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) recognize that National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAPs) are the principal instruments for implementing the Convention at the national level. Cambodia acceded to the Convention in September 1995 and adopted its NBSAP in 2002 in response to Article 6 of the Convention. The long term goal of the Strategy, as described in its vision, is to achieve "equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life through sustainable use, protection and management of biological resources" by using, protecting and managing biodiversity for sustainable development in Cambodia.

The 2002 Strategy provided Cambodia with a framework for action at all levels so as to enhance the country‟s ability to conserve biodiversity, use its biological resources sustainably, ensure the productivity, diversity and integrity of its natural systems and, as a result, its ability to reduce poverty and improve the quality of life of all Cambodians. The 2002 Strategy emphasized capacity building, community involvement and intersectional cooperation. It also described how Cambodia could contribute to international efforts to implement the Convention.

Twelve years after the adoption of its NBSAP, Cambodia has only partly implemented its strategic goals, objectives and priority actions. With the adoption of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and its Aichi Biodiversity Targets by the world community in 2010 and in response to a request of the CBD Conference of the Parties in decision X/21, Cambodia undertook the revision of its NBSAP to have an updated version in place by 2015 at the latest. It is important to note that in 2012, the United Nations reaffirmed the importance of biodiversity and ecosystem services for sustainable development and recognized, through the Rio+20 Conference and the General Assembly, that the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 represents a universally agreed framework for action on biodiversity and a foundation for sustainable development for all stakeholders.

The updating of the NBSAPs is referenced in several decisions of the CBD Conference of the Parties but decisions IX/8 and X/2 are the main decisions providing guidance for NBSAP process, substance, components, support systems, and monitoring and review systems. The main points to note are that:

(a) The updated NBSAP should be in line with the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and include not only the usual objectives for reducing the direct pressures on biodiversity and promoting sustainable use, improving the status of biodiversity by safeguarding ecosystems, species and genetic diversity, and regarding the ways and means for enhancing implementation, but also objectives and targets relating to (i) addressing underlying causes of biodiversity loss and (ii) enhancing the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosystem services;

(b) National targets should be integrated into the NBSAPs to be adopted as policy instruments and integrated into national development and poverty reduction policies and strategies; (c) The updated NBSAPs should take into account the ecosystem approach and the value of biodiversity components; identify priority actions at the national or regional level; identify national and regional targets and associated indicators; and include plans for resource mobilization at the national, regional and international levels.

The updated NBSAPs should also build on the achievements of the 2002 NBSAP, take into account the constraints encountered during the implementation of the strategy and the various strategies and plans (listed in Annex 1) relating to biodiversity and sustainable development adopted by Cambodia since 2002. To ensure harmony, coherence, complementarity and synergy with all these approaches, strategies and plans and that they align with the national development goals and priorities, the updated NBSAP drew on the documents listed in Annex 1.

Box: Process used for updating the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan

The process for updating the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan included a national consultation workshop, experts meetings, a public forum, and sub-national consultation meetings. A Technical Working Group consisting of representatives of 9 ministries was established to work with the International Conventions and Biodiversity Department (ICBD), a body of the General Department of Administration for Nature Conservation (GDANCP) and Protection, within the MOE. There were more than 15 technical working group meetings to review drafts and discuss the revisions of the NBSAP.

More specifically:

(a) The national and subnational stakeholder consultations were held on 4 September 2012, 24 March 2014 and 4 September 2014 to ensure that all biodiversity issues were included and all sectoral plans taken into consideration; (b) The Technical Working Group‟s meetings were organized as follows: (i) Held on 24 July, 6 August and 29-30 August 2012, the first three meetings of the Technical Working Group considered the national biodiversity targets and related indicators. These meetings identified five more themes for inclusion in the NBSAP; (ii) The fourth and fifth meetings held on 18 December 2013 and 2 January 2014 respectively reviewed and approved the Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity before sending it to CBD Secretariat; (iii) The sixth to the tenth meetings, organized on 14 January, 6 February, 3 March, 24 July and 15 August 2014, assessed the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP in light of the national biodiversity status report, and considered the vision, mission, key issues, strategic objectives, key and priority actions of the updated NBSAP; (iv) The eleventh to fifteenth formal and informal meetings had been organized subsequently in late 2014 and beginning of 2015 to review and discuss the identified key priority actions and ensure that they align with sectoral and national development plans and strategies;

(v) In addition to the formal technical working group meeting, there were a few information meetings among multi-sectoral expert groups; (c) An expert meeting was held on 28 October 2014 to review the final technical draft NBSAP and NBSR, focusing on its content and formatting, as well as on the trends in genetic, species, and ecosystem diversities;

(d) The Inception workshop was organized on 4 September 2012 to announce and call for the cooperation and involvement of all relevant stakeholders, including the indigenous and local community, academies, and the private sector in the implementation of this project, and to take into account their inputs for updating the NBSAP and NBSR; (e) The first consultation workshop was held on 24 March 2014, with the participation of government institutions, national and international organizations, and other stakeholders. The workshop discussed and endorsed the key elements of the NBSAP, including the national targets and biodiversity indicators. The second meeting was a national workshop held on 04 September 2014 for a thorough and in-depth discussion of the key elements of the updated NBSAP, including the national biodiversity status report; the NBSAP vision, mission, strategic objectives and priority actions; the national targets, the actions required for achieving the targets, indicators of progress towards the achievement of the targets, and the roles in and responsibilities for implementing the targets and the NBSAP; enabling conditions; as well as monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

The National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC) has been established to provide guidance, to provide an overview and to make decisions on the overall project implementation and adoption of the revised NBSAP and NBSR. This committee is composed of 17 members, including the Minister of Environment as chair, members from 14 relevant institutions and 3 representative governors from three sub national regions: lowland, mountain, and marine areas. There were three National Biodiversity Steering Committee meetings held on 1 November 2012, 7 July 2014, and 4 March 2015 to review additional adoptions in the updating of the NBSAP and NBSR.

Structure of NBSAP Updating Task Force

Inputs for Updating Cambodian NBSAP

- Chair TWG, MOE - Project Director - Project Assistants - Sectoral Biodiversity Experts (MOE, MAFF, MOP, MRD, MOEF, MOEYS, MOWRAM, MOT, and MOME)

- Technical Working Group - Concerned ministries/departments - National and International

Advisors - Academies, private sectors, ILC - Civil societies and IOs/NGOs

- Minister of the Environment, chair - Secretary of State (MAFF), Deputy - Under Secretary of States from 12 institutions, members - Governors of 3 provinces, members

Technical Work, Inputs & Collaboration

- Collect relevant information - Develop proposals for implementing of Strategy and Action Plan

- Liaise and coordinate BPU - Discuss ideas, proposals, and draft document with BPU Technical Direction & Cooperation

- Assist in development of Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan

- Review draft proposals and reports - Submit draft documents to NBSC - Organize meetings & workshops - Overall project administration Project Direction & Policy Development

- Provide guidance and monitor project implementation - Review and endorse final draft of NBSAP and NBSR - Submit final drafts to government

Cambodian Biodiversity Targets

NBSAP UPDATING 2015

Aichi Biodiversity Targets

NBSR Updating 5th National Report

National Policies

NBSAP-2002

Sectoral Plans

MDG/NDP, …

II. OVERALL STRATEGY OF THE UPDATED NBSAP AND NATIONAL TARGETS Vision

By 2050, Cambodia‟s biodiversity and its ecosystem services are valued, conserved, restored where necessary, wisely used and managed, so as to ensure equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life for all in the country.

Mission

To use, protect and manage biodiversity for sustainable development in Cambodia. To ensure this, biodiversity issues and values are mainstreamed in national development and sectoral policies, plans and programmes; biodiversity, our natural capital, is protected by reducing the various direct and indirect pressures causing its loss or degradation, and is used wisely so as to enhance the benefits from it to the people of Cambodia, particularly in rural areas; and the enabling environment for effective and efficient implementation of this mission is strengthened.

Overall strategic objectives

In order to achieve the mission and vision of this Strategy, Cambodia adopted the following framework strategic objectives:

a. Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about genetic resources, species, habitats or ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable development and poverty eradication in Cambodia as a priority for conservation and sustainable use;

b. Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s priority biodiversity components; and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures;

c. Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia from biodiversity and associated ecosystem services, for an equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life;

d. Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the strategy.

These strategic objectives will be considered under each of the themes (see below) identified as areas where implementation activities will be focused. They are in line with the four values that the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) retained to guide actions identified in many development strategies, such as the Strategic Planning Framework 2010-2019 for Fisheries2: Understanding (assessment of status and trend of, and threats to, biodiversity and associated ecosystem services), Protecting, Growing (addressing causes of biodiversity loss, and enhancement of benefits) and Supporting (enhancement of the enabling conditions).

Rationales and key generic actions under the overall strategic objectives

Strategic objective A: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about genetic resources, species, habitats or ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable development and poverty eradication in Cambodia, as a priority for conservation and sustainable use.

Rationale

Cambodia is blessed with an abundance of natural riches3, with new species being discovered frequently4. The majority of the population relies directly on these natural resources for their food, livelihoods and well-being. As such, Cambodia has taken a number of conservation measures to safeguard this natural capital that is otherwise subject to various pressures, including habitat damage/loss (which is considered as the most direct and critical threat to biodiversity in Cambodia), climate change, pollution, unsustainable use of natural resources. However, the implementation of these conservation measures has proven to be a real challenge.

Due to limited resources, Cambodia has needed to adopt a step-by-step approach focusing first on the components of biodiversity that are important for sustainable development and poverty reduction, and then on those that are currently in danger of disappearance or degradation, or could be subject to high risks in the near future. Priority components of biodiversity must therefore be identified. Criteria for identifying important components of biodiversity can be based on Annex I to the Convention on Biological Diversity and on criteria for ecologically and biologically significant areas adopted by the CBD Conference of the Parties in 2010. Their importance, including their biological/ecological, cultural, spiritual and socioeconomic values, must be described and their status monitored regularly.

Table 1 in the 2002 NBSAP, which presents examples of services and goods provided by ecosystems in Cambodia, can be used as a starting point for listing the value of ecosystems found in Cambodia. To the list it is necessary to add dryland, savannahs, marine and urban ecosystems and possibly mountains and islands. These ecosystems need to be mapped and their value assessed using e.g. TEEB guidelines. It is also useful to refer to UNEP/CBD/COP/12/4 (from page 31).

As noted in the Fifth National Report, the concept of ecosystem services and other biodiversity values is not fully understood in Cambodia. That being said, people are gradually becoming aware of the consequences of not managing the environment sustainably. Awareness about these components and their value needs to be raised among the people and decision-makers. This knowledge needs to be included in education curricula, it needs to be disseminated in the media and taken into consideration in the government‟s discussions on laws, budgets, programmes and strategies, and it needs to be integrated into the wider development programmes and strategies, and in all the sectors.

Adequate monitoring followed by regular reporting and a wide dissemination of information on the status and trends of priority biodiversity components will allow decision-makers at all levels to adopt and implement adaptive management programmes, and the government to develop adequate policy responses. People are more disposed to protect the things that they know, and even more so when they know the importance of what it is they are to protect. Regular reporting will also contribute to enhancing public awareness and participation.

Table 1: Key actions and roles of the Ministries for Strategic Objective A

Key action Responsible Ministries and other participating Ministries

1.1. Assess the functioning, role, value/importance for sustainable development and poverty eradication, status and trends of biodiversity and its components in Cambodia.

Information on the status and trends of, and threats to, biodiversity and the related ecosystem services combined with information on the contribution of biodiversity components to sustainable development and poverty eradication will inform about those components of biodiversity that require priority attention for protection, sustainable use measures and funding.

This study requires indicators and can provide the baseline data needed as reference when evaluating progress and should also include an assessment of the consequences of ecosystem degradation and biodiversity loss in general, e.g. loss of ecosystem resilience.

As a prerequisite, it is necessary to define methodologies, build human capacity and mobilize the financial resources needed.

MOE, MAFF and GSSD

MLMUPC, MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME, MOC, MOH, MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

1.2. Establish a list of the priority components of biodiversity and ecosystem services including their ecological/environmental and socioeconomic values; in other words their provisioning, regulation, cultural or spiritual, and / or supporting values.

[MOE, MAFF and GSSD

MLMUPC, MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME, MOC, MOH, MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

1.3. Monitor and report regularly on the status of these environmentally/ecologically, socially (including health) and economically important components of biodiversity.

MOE and GSSD

MAFF, MLMUPC, MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME, MOP, NCDM and TSA

1.4. Organize data and information collected, including the associated scientific, traditional knowledge and information from other sources, in user-friendly and widely accessible databases for dissemination and use in awareness-raising, as well as education programmes and for decision-making. MOE and GSSD MAFF, MLMUPC, MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME, MOC, MOH, MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

1.5. Raise awareness about the priority components of biodiversity, including their associated ecosystem services and their values, and promote engagement of the different sectors, through various types of publications, education programmes and the media. As noted in decision X/32.2 g of the CBD Conference of the Parties, the sectors should include inter alia, energy, the financial sector, forestry, wildlife management, fisheries, water supply, agriculture, disaster prevention, health, and climate change. MOE/GSSD, MAFF and MOEYS MOT, MRD, MEF , MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM, NFP and TSA

Implementation of this strategic objective and the identified actions will contribute to (i) the implementation of Aichi Biodiversity Target 18 and Cambodia Biodiversity Target 17, both on traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities; and Aichi Biodiversity Target 19 on knowledge, the science base and technologies relating to biodiversity, as well as Cambodia Biodiversity Target 19 on an information system containing data and information on biodiversity, and (ii) the achievement of the other Aichi biodiversity targets and other Cambodia biodiversity targets.

Strategic objective B: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia's priority biodiversity components; and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures.

Rationale

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, there has been a lot of progress in terms of the conservation of biodiversity in Cambodia. However, there are still a lot of constraints in the implementation of the strategy, also the intensity of the pressures on biodiversity is high even and increasing in some cases.

As noted in the 3rd edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook, one of the main reasons for the failure to slow biodiversity loss between 2002 and 2010 is that measures taken tended to focus only on the state of biodiversity, such as protected areas and programmes targeted at particular species, or on addressing the direct pressures of biodiversity loss. These direct pressures consist of land-use change, habitat fragmentation, land degradation and degradation of habitats used by migratory species; climate change; introduction and spread of invasive alien species; unsustainable exploitation of natural resources, including illegal trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora, overexploitation, overharvesting, and overgrazing; pollution with wastes, pesticides and fertilizers; and natural disasters. As noted in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (2009), biodiversity loss and other environmental problems hinder Cambodia‟s progress toward sustainable development:

(a) Land-use, which is already a complicated issue, difficult to manage and control in some provinces and cities, is compounded by issues of land tenure; (b) Degradation of forests and the loss of biodiversity due to illegal logging, land clearing and hunting of rare/endangered species are causing, not only environmental problems, but also creating adverse impacts on the socioeconomic development, especially in local communities;

(c) A large number of Cambodians, especially in rural and remote areas are experiencing scarcity of water for domestic uses and irrigation; and (d) Economic sectors like mining, industry, energy, water supply and tourism development are facing many environmental problems requiring urgent and effective solutions in order to ensure long-term sustainable development.

The 3rd edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook also indicated that underlying causes of biodiversity had not been addressed in a meaningful manner. It was thus strongly recommended to use every opportunity to prevent underlying pressures from inevitably leading to pressures that impact biodiversity directly. A literature survey indicates that indirect causes of biodiversity loss include:

(e) Causes from socioeconomic and cultural environment, such as poverty often linked to demographic growth and unsustainable consumption, production, economic demand, markets and trade; lack of awareness and knowledge including ignorance of impact of new technologies; inadequate gender considerations, and non-valorization of traditional knowledge;

(f) Weaknesses in policy and legal response consisting essentially of limited political will, despite the fact that the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) outlined four main objectives in the Rectangular Strategy Phase II, of which the fourth is to ensure environmental sustainability through sustainable management of natural resources, inadequate national compliance with multilateral environmental agreements, inadequate sector integration or weak appropriation/ownership of the NBSAP by major stakeholders, inadequate and obsolete legislation, and weak enforcement; and (g) Weakness in institutional response, generally resulting from lack of or poor planning, weak co-ordination structures, insufficient participation, and inadequate funding of biodiversity.

Improving knowledge on the value of biodiversity, and the causes and consequences of biodiversity loss as well as a change of behavior by all stakeholders in favor of biodiversity conservation are fundamental to addressing indirect causes of biodiversity loss.

Strategic objective B recognizes that the most appropriate measures to avert loss or degradation of biodiversity can be taken when adequate information on pressures and their impacts is available.

Table 2: Key actions and roles of the Ministries for Strategic Objective B

Key action Responsible Ministries and other

participating Ministries

2.1 Investigate the direct pressures causing the loss or degradation of biodiversity and related ecosystem services, and regularly monitor their impacts MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME, MOWRAM, MLMUPC and TSA

2.2 Keeping in mind the ecosystem approach and requirements for sustainable development, put in place or strengthen measures that will control, or whenever possible, stop the direct pressures and reduce their impact on biodiversity, particularly in natural habitats and vulnerable ecosystems MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MAFF, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM, NFP, TSA and NCDM

2.3 Carry out research showing and assessing the cause-effect relationship between underlying factors and biodiversity loss and degradation, and use the results to develop and implement plans and programmes that will reduce the negative impact of underlying factors on Cambodia‟s natural capital MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MAFF, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM, NFP and TSA

2.4 Regularly assess and improve, as needed, the effectiveness of measures taken to address direct and indirect causes of the loss and degradation of biodiversity and associated ecosystem services, bearing in mind the principles of adaptive management MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MCFA, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

2.5 Promote a planning process that is participatory, ensuring in particular the involvement of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, that uses biodiversity-inclusive strategic environmental MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME,

assessments and environmental impact assessments, and that takes into account the ecosystem approach as well as the guidelines for the sustainable use of biodiversity and similar guidelines, particularly for agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries, forestry, landscape management, public works and industrial development MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

2.6 Bearing in mind the current coverage of the protected area system in Cambodia, complete the ecological representativeness of the system by creating protected areas in forests, fresh waters and marine and coastal areas, and focus on ensuring effective and equitable management of all protected areas and conservation areas, connectivity, and integration of the protected area system into the wider landscape and seascape MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MCFA, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

[[2.7 Restore or rehabilitate degraded ecosystems and recover threatened species and genetic resources, for the benefit of all in Cambodia, in particular members of the local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities who rely directly on local biodiversity and ecosystem services for their livelihoods and well-being MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MCFA, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

2.8 Integrate biodiversity and its ecosystem services into wider national and subnational development strategies and plans MOE, MAFF, MOT, MRD, MOI, and GSSD MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

2.9 Enhance awareness about direct and indirect causes of biodiversity loss and degradation, their environmental and socioeconomic consequences, and measures taken or to be taken by decision-makers at all levels, in the government, local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, the private sector, and all the economic sectors relying on or impacting the natural capital MOE, MAFF, MOEYS and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

2.10 Put in place and promote the use of incentive measures favorable to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and effective law enforcement mechanisms MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

2.11 Mobilize human and financial resources needed for the implementation of these actions and empower the relevant institutions MOE, MEF, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Key actions 2.6 (on Cambodia protected area system taking into account the urgent need to protect and recover threatened species) and 2.7 (on restoration of degraded ecosystems and recovery of threatened species) are in line with the key potential actions identified in the 4th edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook that could accelerate progress towards the achievements of the strategic goals of the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, if more widely applied. With regard to ecosystem restoration, it is important to recall a conclusion from the Economics of Ecosystem and Biodiversity (TEEB) Initiative that investments in maintenance and conservation are almost always cheaper than trying to restore damaged ecosystems. Nevertheless, the social benefits that flow from restoration of ecosystems providing essential services (for example wetlands, coral reefs, rivers, forests and mountain areas, and "water towers") can be several times higher than the costs.

Implementation of this Strategic Objective B directly covers the implementation of Aichi Biodiversity Targets 1 to 15 and contributes to the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 13, 14 and 15.

Strategic objective C: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia from biodiversity and associated ecosystem services for an equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life.

Rationale

Under strategic objective A, components of biodiversity important for sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia will be described and their value assessed. Under this strategic objective C, measures put forward under the strategic objective B above are promoted so as to strengthen and enhance the benefits from these measures in a sustainable way. The focus will be on the supply of essential services, including services related to water, health, food security, climate change adaptation, resistance and resilience to land degradation or natural disasters and, in general, services related to livelihoods and the well-being of all in Cambodia. The specific needs of women, local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, elderly persons, children, and the poor and vulnerable will be taken into account.

The realization of the benefits from measures taken will act as incentives for biodiversity conservation and sustainable use. It is expected that public engagement combined with appropriate pricing, fiscal policies such as a green tax, adjustment of national rules and frameworks for markets and economic activities and other mechanisms to reflect the real value of biodiversity could facilitate the creation of powerful incentives (including the removal of perverse subsidies) that would not only reverse patterns of destruction resulting from biodiversity under-valuation, but that would also strengthen the short and long-term gains one can derive from conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.

The short, medium and long-term interventions put forward in the National Green Growth Roadmap adopted by Cambodia in 2009 provide an overall guidance for enhancing benefits from biodiversity in the country. As embodied in the Roadmap‟s goal, the Green Growth initiatives "foster sustainability of economic growth by enhancing sustainable consumption and production, by greening markets and businesses, by creating favorable climate for the establishment of sustainable infrastructure that, in turn, can enable the population to enjoy increased access to crucial goods and services and to ensure equal access to resources for both women and men".

Implementation of the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization, as well as the utilization of associated traditional knowledge and implementation of related legislations, when in place, will provide guarantees for improving the livelihoods of local people as knowledge-holders and contribute to the cost of conserving biodiversity. Cambodia signed the Protocol on 1 February 2012 and became Party on 19 April 2015. The Protocol entered into force in October 2014.

Table 3: Key actions and roles of the Ministries for Strategic objective C

Key action Responsible Ministries and other

participating Ministries

3.1 Assess the level of functioning of ecosystems associated with essential services, including services related to water, health, food security, climate change adaptation, resistance and resilience to climate change, land degradation or natural disasters and, in general, services related to livelihoods and the well-being of all in Cambodia MOE, MAFF, MOT and GSSD MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

3.2 Improve or maintain at favourable levels the status and functioning of biologically, ecologically and socioeconomically important ecosystems, species and genetic diversity by developing and implementing appropriate management plans and positive incentives [MOE, MAFF, MOT and GSSD MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

3.3 Develop and implement a biodiversity economic valuation5 and accounting programme to generate information that will allow the integration of biodiversity into national accounting and trading of biodiversity components, and thus realize the contribution of biodiversity to the national budget MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MME, MOC, MOH, MLMUPC, MOI, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA and TSA

3.4 Mainstream biodiversity into key development sectors, including into relevant national and local policies and programmes, public and private sector decision-making, development planning, land-use planning, sustainable use and management of natural resources and poverty alleviation plans, climate resilience plans, and formal and informal education system MOE, MAFF, MOEYS and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

3.5 Raise awareness, understanding and ownership of all stakeholders, in particular in the private sector and among members of the local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, regarding the value of biodiversity and the contribution of its conservation and sustainable use to livelihoods and well-being, building on mechanisms existing in the country MOE, MAFF, MOEYS and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MME, MOC, MOH, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA and TSA

3.6 Develop and implement, in harmony with international and regional agreements to which Cambodia is party, an incentive system of subsidies, taxes and regulations that encourages the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and environmentally responsible behaviour, and eliminates, phases out or reforms harmful subsidies on, for instance, fossil fuels and agriculture MOE, MAFF, MEF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MOEYS, MME, MOC, MLMUPC, MOH, MOI, MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA, MCFA, NCDM, TSA

3.7 Develop and implement a scheme for innovative resource mobilization, including in particular and in line with the Green Growth Roadmap: (i) payment for ecosystem services to pay for biodiversity activities; (ii) green tax and budget reform; and (iii) swap of debts schemes with international investors MOE, MAFF, MEF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

This Strategic Objective C is in line with Aichi Biodiversity Strategic Goal D on enhancing the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosystem services.

Strategic objective D: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the strategy

Rationale

Implementation of the NBSAP objectives depends on various needs that have to be fulfilled to pave the way for the actions that will directly result in the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and lead to the ultimate goal of ensuring equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life for all in Cambodia. These needs are usually associated with the indirect drivers of change in biodiversity; namely, the human population, economic activity, technology and socio-political and cultural factors.

In 2013, Cambodia's population was estimated to be 15.2 million, with an annual growth rate of 1.7% and a density of 82.74 persons per square kilometer in 2011. As stated in the Fifth National Report under the Convention on Biological Diversity, Cambodia was ranked 138 of 187 countries in the UNDP‟s Human Development Index in 2013. However, the country‟s poverty rate declined to 20% in 2012 with a GDP per capita that increased from USD $760 in 2008 to almost USD $1,000 in 2012, making Cambodia the 15th fastest growing economy in the world in the past ten years, 5th among developing countries achieving the Millennium Development Goals, and 1st in improving social indicators in the Asia Pacific region. In any case, the rapid population growth is one factor that is viewed as a possible obstacle to green growth. The unsustainable use of natural resources increases with demographic growth and increased demand for biodiversity resources used in production. Migration and urbanization associated to the high demographic trend also exacerbate the pressures on ecosystems. Population increase is among the drivers of pressure on biodiversity, and is something that cannot be reversed rapidly. It requires long-term strategies and policies from the government aiming at bringing consumption of biological resources and the use of various ecosystem goods and services within safe ecological limits. Awareness-raising and capacity-building are ways used to help populations achieve some sustainability in their use of natural resources; they become more conscious of the value of biodiversity, of associated traditional knowledge, and of the impacts of anthropogenic activities.

Over the last decades, Cambodia has experienced rapid economic growth resulting in significant poverty reduction. Despite the global downturn, the Cambodian economy remains in good shape, driven by continuous and increasing investments in the garment industry, agriculture, construction and tourism. The economy is underpinned by political stability, active private sector participation, reform efforts, increased official development aid and sustained foreign direct investment. Exploitable oil deposits were recently found underneath Cambodia's territorial waters, representing a potential revenue stream for the government, if commercial extraction becomes feasible. Opportunities for mining bauxite, gold, iron and gems are also attracting investors. However, economic growth in Cambodia is happening largely at the expense of the environment, with extensive overexploitation of Cambodia's fisheries and forests that are now disappearing at a rapid rate owing to the compound negative impacts on water retention and soils, and resulting in the loss of habitats for many species of animals and plants, as well as in CO2 emissions. In addition, the poverty level in Cambodia is still high and posing, with demographic imbalance, a daunting challenge to long-term economic development. The major economic challenge for Cambodia over the next decade will be fashioning an economic environment that will have a significantly reduced impact on biodiversity and in which the private sector can create enough jobs to handle Cambodia's demographic imbalance.

In the past decades, the Government of Cambodia has developed policies, strategies, plans and programmes that provide a supportive enabling environment for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity (see Annex 1) both at the national level and, essentially through the Agreement on the Cooperation for the Sustainable Development of the Mekong River Basin, at the regional level. Through this updated NBSAP, Cambodia intends to further mainstream biodiversity considerations in the implementation on the ground of all these relevant policies, strategies, plans and programmes and more specifically by integrating biodiversity into key economic development sectors, into development planning, policy and legal reforms, strategic environmental assessment (SEA), environmental impact assessment (EIA), land-use planning, sustainable use and management of natural resources, poverty alleviation plans, climate resilience plans, education systems and economic mechanisms such as public-private partnerships, market-based certification, voluntary best practices, economic valuation, payment for ecosystem services, and biodiversity offsets. Mainstreaming makes sense, as biodiversity touches upon almost all economic sectors, and, as such, conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity cannot be achieved only through environmental policies.

Table 4: Key actions for strengthening the enabling environment and roles of the Ministries under Strategic Objectives D

Key action Responsible Ministries and other

participating Ministries

Human capacities

4.1 Building on previous and ongoing capacity needs assessments, identify the human capacities needed for the implementation of the NBSAP; assess the existing capacities; develop and implement plans, using a participatory approach, to fill the capacity gaps by supporting both formal and informal education programmes tailored for different levels of the society and relevant sectors, by making use of regional cooperation, South-South and North-South cooperation, and by mobilizing the required financial resources (See theme 20 for more details). MOE, MOEYS, MEF, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, MCFA, NCDM and TSA

4.2 Encourage and support, including through the provision of guidance and resources, provincial and local authorities so that they can develop and implement local biodiversity strategies and related action plans. MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

[[ Institutional and legislative capacities

4.3 Building on previous and ongoing capacity needs assessments, identify institutions that need to be strengthened and review relevant national legislation and policies relating to biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services; develop and implement plans to strengthen existing institutions, including inter-agency bodies; enforce relevant laws inter alia through training programmes for the relevant authorities and enforce the provision of the equipment/resources needed; promote incentives that will support implementation of the NBSAP, and mobilize the required financial resources (See themes 15 and 21 for more details). MOE and GSSD MAFF, MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Technological capacities

4.4 Building on previous and ongoing capacity needs assessments, identify technologies needed for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and associated ecosystem services; bearing in mind the gaps in technology, develop and implement plans to acquire and/or adapt and validate the needed technologies in line with national and international legislation or as part of the Nagoya Protocol, and mobilize the required financial resources (See theme 17 for more details) MOE, MOEYS, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Financial sustainability

4.5 Bearing in mind that lack of financial resources was a major obstacle to the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP, assess the financial needs for implementing the updated NBSAP; and develop and implement a strategy for enhancing the effectiveness in using existing financial resources and for resource mobilization from diverse sources, including national and international sources, taking into account the existing range of conventional and innovative funding instruments, so as to ensure financial sustainability (See theme 18 for more details). MOE, MAFF, MEF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM, NFP and TSA

4.6 Ensure, through participatory planning and enhanced coordination, synergies among biodiversity projects and programmes under different MOE and GSSD

Ministries, and establish strategic partnerships with the finance and business sectors. MAFF, MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Participation and diversification of governance

4.7 Bearing in mind that biodiversity and its ecosystem services constitutes our natural capital and is the basis of life on Earth, also that its management, conservation and sustainable use involves everybody, encourage the participation of all stakeholders, including local communities, indigenous ethnic minorities and the private sector, in the planning, deciding on measures to be taken for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and implementing them. MOE, MAFF, MOT and GSSD MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOP, MOWRAM, MOWA, TSA

4.8 In line with the ecosystem approach and the Rectangular Strategy, ensure that management is decentralized to the lowest appropriate level for greater efficiency, effectiveness and equity (See theme 19 for more details). MOE MAFF, MOI and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, , MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Coordination and cooperation among stakeholders at the sub-national, national, regional and global levels

4.9 Bearing in mind that implementation of the NBSAP is a collaborative effort calling on all stakeholders, enhance a synergistic and coherent implementation of and reporting on biodiversity-related programmes initiated under different national strategies and plans, and regional and international agreements, making efficient use of the clearinghouse mechanism for technical and scientific cooperation, and avoiding a piecemeal approach to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity (See theme 23 for more details). MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MCFA, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Education, public awareness and research development and coordination

4.10 Further integrate biodiversity, in particular its valuation and ways and means to conserve it and use it sustainably, in the national education and research system, as well as in public awareness programmes, and promote environmental awareness and formal and non-formal environmental education curriculums and programmes, while improving the knowledge base at the national and local level. MOE, MAFF, MOEYS and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, , MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

4.11 Enhance coordination and synergies for efficient use of resources in implementing education, public awareness and research programmes dealing with biodiversity (See theme 20 for more details). MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

4.12 Establish and strengthen key research institutions, such as biodiversity centers, ecotourism centers, biodiversity training and livelihood centers, botanical gardens, gene banks, refuge centers, information centers. MOE and GSSD MAFF, MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MAFF, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM, NFP and TSA

4.13 Enhance mechanisms for the management, dissemination, targeted communication and exchange of scientific data and knowledge, including traditional knowledge, about biodiversity and related ecosystem services, making effective use of the clearing-house mechanism (See theme 24 for additional details). MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

Socioeconomic development, quality of life and poverty reduction

4.14 Foster studies that enhance the contribution of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use to socioeconomic development, poverty reduction and improved quality of life; and disseminate the results widely, particularly to decision and policy-makers. MOE, MAFF and GSSD MOT, MRD, MEF, MOEYS, MCFA, MCRA, MIH, MLMUPC, MME, MOC, MOH, MOI, MOINF, MOP, MOWRAM, MPWT, MOWA, NCDM and TSA

This Strategic Objective D encompasses Aichi Biodiversity Targets 16 to 20 and sustains the development goals adopted by the Royal Government of Cambodia in the Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in Cambodia. Implementation of this Strategic Objective also supports the Sustainable Development Goal 17 (Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development).

The above overall strategic objectives will be implemented under each of the 24 themes identified by the Technical Working Group (TWG) as areas of focus for the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP), areas in which Cambodia has been mainstreaming biodiversity. Implementation of these strategic objectives is expected to meet most of the environmental quality objectives proposed in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (2009), i.e. productive land resources, rich forest resources, high quality ground‐ and surface water resources, rich fish resources, functional wetlands, sustainable marine‐ and coastal environment, rich biodiversity, limited influence on the climate, efficient use of natural resources and limited waste generation and limited impact from natural disasters, and clean air. They will also be used as a check list whenever a new ecosystem (e.g. urban ecosystem) or a specific landscape/seascape (the socio-ecological production landscapes and seascapes under the Satoyama Initiative) is found important for integration in the NBSAP.

Principles governing the strategy

Effective implementation of the NBSAP will be guided by principles and approaches underpinning the way Cambodia is promoting sustainable development, so as to reach the strategic objectives and achieve the vision of this NBSAP. These principles are basically the same as the ones listed in the 2002 NBSAP. They were revised in light of the Rectangular Strategy 2009-2013 and its decentralization and deconcentration policy, the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) (2006-2010), the National Green Growth Roadmap 2013-2030, and other strategies listed in Annex 1 of this NBSAP. The principles are:

1. Our natural capital consisting of biodiversity, its ecosystem services and other natural resources underpins our country‟s economy, society, cultures and individual well-being. The values of the benefits we can derive from biodiversity are, however, often overlooked or poorly understood. They are yet to be fully taken into account in day-to-day decisions by all citizens and through economic signals in markets, and to be reflected adequately in the accounts of our society.

2. Awareness of the value of biodiversity, its status and trend, the threats posed to its maintenance and proper functioning is a prerequisite for achieving conservation and sustainability in the use of natural resources.

3. All the people of Cambodia depend on biodiversity and thus have a responsibility to ensure that biodiversity is conserved and used in a sustainable manner for the well-being of both present and future generations.

4. The ecosystem approach is the primary framework for any decision and activity dealing with biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services. This approach consists of managing land, water and living resources in ways that promote conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity components and the sharing of benefits from the utilization of genetic resources. The approach is consistent with the spiritual and cultural values, as well as customary practices of local communities, the indigenous ethnic minorities and their traditional knowledge, innovations and practices.

5. In accordance with the Rectangular Strategy and Principle 2 of the ecosystem approach, the management of biodiversity should be decentralized to the lowest appropriate level for greater efficiency, effectiveness and equity. Therefore, provincial and local authorities should be involved, wherever possible, in the planning and managing of biodiversity.

6. Bearing in mind the potential gains from the management of biodiversity, there is usually a need to understand and manage ecosystems in an economic context (Ecosystem approach Principle 4) and thus to:

7. Reduce those market distortions that adversely affect biodiversity; 8. Align incentives to promote biodiversity conservation and sustainable use; 9. Internalize costs and benefits in the given ecosystem to the extent feasible. 10. Most problems of biodiversity management are complex and should involve all relevant sectors of society. They require the participation of all the stakeholders,6 including local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities; cooperation among different ministerial departments and line ministries; between public and private organizations; governmental, non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations, as appropriate.

11. The conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components require local, national (including within and between ministries, between the public and private sectors) and global co-operation and the sharing of knowledge, costs and benefits.

12. In order to succeed in slowing down biodiversity loss, indirect drivers must be tackled, where possible, together with direct pressures, so as to break the link between the indirect and direct drivers of biodiversity loss and thus prevent underlying pressures from inevitably leading to pressures impacting biodiversity directly.

13. For a sustainable life, in harmony with nature and other people, one should not take more from nature than nature's ability to regenerate those products, and the use of natural resources must be shared among people in a reasonable and equitable way. The extraction of natural resources must be done in a nondestructive manner and by transparent means, in order to care for the future of our motherland.

14. Long term development depends on the ecosystems‟ capacity to deliver goods and services. 15. Systems with a diversity of components are generally more resilient to perturbations or disturbances than systems with few components.

16. Development decisions must reflect ecological, economic, social, cultural and spiritual values of local populations.

17. Healthy, evolving ecosystems and the maintenance of natural processes are prerequisites for the in situ conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of biological resources.

18. Ex situ measures may be required to support the conservation of some species and populations and are essential to ensuring the sustainable use of many agricultural, forest and aquatic resources.

19. The knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity should be respected; their use and maintenance be subject to their prior informed consent or approval and carried out with the support and involvement of these communities; and the benefits arising from the utilization of such knowledge, innovations and practices should be shared equitably.

20. The conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of biological resources will be carried out using the best knowledge available and approaches refined as new knowledge is gained.

21. Biodiversity-inclusive strategic environmental assessment and environmental impact assessment will ensure that development projects are respectful of biodiversity and its ecosystem services.

22. The nature of biodiversity is complex and its scope wide. Consequently, there is a need to use interdisciplinary, cross-sectoral and multi-scale approaches in addressing it.7

III.

RATIONALE FOR THE OVERALL STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES 3.1 Assessment of the implementation of the 2002 National Biodiversity Strategy and

Action Plan

The 2002 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan proposed a series of strategic objectives and priority actions that were addressed under 17 themes corresponding to important sectors in Cambodia.

Under the first theme, Protection of Natural Resources, significant progress has been observed, with 26% of the national land and inland waters becoming designated as protected areas and conservation areas. In addition, important legal and policy documents have been approved, including the 2014 Strategic Framework for National Protected Area System Strategic Management Plan; the 2008 Protected Area Law, the 2006 Law on Fisheries and the 2002 Law on Forestry. However, generally speaking, the effectiveness of the management of protected areas and conservation areas has been limited due to outdated plans or the absence of plans altogether, as well as a lack of PAs zoning and boundary demarcation. In addition, a critical weakness of the protected area system has been that conservation activities, especially research projects carried out by NGOs, were essentially funded and somehow driven externally.

Regarding the Animal Wildlife Resources theme, a sub decree was promulgated on the List of Cambodia's national animals and tree species. In addition, the following were published: the 2003 Phyto-sanitary control and other relevant MAFF notifications for protecting some animal species. Little progress was observed in the implementation of the national monitoring program on invasive alien species, but a 10-year national strategic and action plan on invasive species was developed.

Under the Freshwater Fisheries and Aquaculture theme, the framework of the 10-year Strategic Plan 2009-2018, the first three-year-rolling on Fishery Sector Development Action Plan 2009-2011, 468 community fisheries, 8 fish sanctuaries, 13 State and 267 private hatcheries operated with 15,000 families engaged in small-scale aquaculture were developed. Furthermore, aquaculture activities were expanded and more actions were taken to enhance illegal fishing control8. The inland fish exploitation increased by 10.6% in 2013 compared to the previous year and its growth was around 39% compared to the period between 2008 and 2012. Similarly, marine fish exploitation increased by 11% and its growth was around 50% compared to 2008-2012. Aquaculture of fish, prawn, crocodile, and fingerling stock hatchery continue to develop actively9.

Regarding the Coastal and Marine Resources theme, the Cambodian government created an integrated coastal zone management system in the coastal area to protect the environment and manage the use of natural resources for sustainable economic development. The government undertook building up the capacity for fish breeding, giant prawn hatchling technique and promoted aquaculture activities through stocking of key species, which was contributing to family income.

Under the Forest and Wild Plan Resources theme, the Forest Resource Management and Conservation Programme included the development of sustainable forest management plans, management systems for production forests outside of community forests, biodiversity management plans in protected forests, the conservation of genetic resources from forests and the establishment of seed sources for planting programs, multi-purpose tree plantations, local forest product development and market promotion, the expansion of timber processing and the use of more efficient technologies, and forest certification10.

Regarding the Agriculture and Animal Production theme, the MAFF continued to strengthen agricultural extension services for better cultivation techniques and effective practices, plant protection, the use and maintenance of agricultural machinery, postharvest and storage technology.

Work under the Energy Resources theme includes an energy efficiency program for households, and the promotion of fuelwood and multipurpose tree plantations. Progress under this theme has been limited due to a lack of financial support for implementation.

Good progress has been made under the Mineral Resources theme, through the application of the 1999 sub-decree on environmental impact assessment for hydropower and other energy development prepared by the MME and all the development projects on energy, hydropower and mine exploration. The MME cooperated with the Ministry of Environment in conducting the environmental impact assessment to ensure the sustainability of development projects related to community environment11.

Regarding the Industry, Technology and Services theme, Cambodia signed the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety in 2003, and adopted its biosafety law in 2007. The National Ecotourism Policy and Strategic Plan (2010) was developed prioritizing the following regions: Northeast Region, Tonle Sap Multiple Use Area, Coastal and Cardamom Mountain Region12.

Progress on the Environmental Security theme is limited. However, this did not prevent the adoption of the Natural Resource and Environmental Protection Law and the Biosafety Law. Both laws contribute to the prevention of any cause and damage to genetic resources and to biodiversity in general, including causes or damage from modern biotechnology. The Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MOWRAM) has implemented the Law on Water Resources and houses a meteorology station.

In terms of Land-use planning, various institutional capacity building programmes were carried out on land-use planning, including participatory land-use planning, the establishment of the national base map, and the Master Plan for the national spatial data infrastructure.

Work on the Water Resource theme is in progress. The principle of integrated water resource management requires coordinated multi-sectoral water use planning. There is also a need to conserve and maintain biodiversity and its ecosystems, maintain, and construct 141 irrigation system projects; improve its service quality; minimize the impacts of its developments and operations on the environment and surrounding communities; collaborate and participate in the management of the Mekong basin, considering the management of water resources, the sustain biodiversity aquatic and fish life.

In terms of Climate Change and Biodiversity, the following were developed: the 2006 national adaptation programme of action on climate change, the 1999 first national communication on climate change, and the 2007 second national communication to the UNFCCC and Cambodia climate change strategic plan (2014-2023). In addition, priority actions in the NBSAP include the integration of biodiversity objectives into the future national climate change action plan, improvement of weather forecasts to ensure timely warnings of natural occurrences and of the meteorological networks, and the lobbying of developed countries to decrease emissions related to climate change13.

In terms of Community Participation, MOE and MAFF have been promoting and encouraging the participation of local community members and ethnic groups in events on the conservation and protection of natural resources. MOE and MAFF are also encouraging the locals living in and around the protected areas and protected forests to create CPAs, CFs, Community Fisheries Networks, Community based Ecotourism Networks, and a Network of Participatory Land-use planning.

In terms of Awareness, Education, Research Coordination and Development, there has been good progress since MOE has a long standing awareness programme on biodiversity, climate change, and biosafety through debating on climate change, biosafety, biodiversity and related issues. MAFF also regularly conducted debates on animal production, fisheries and forestry protection; while provincial authorities undertook various forms of awareness-raising and trainings on biodiversity conservation at various locations using both formal and informal forms.

Work on the Legislation and Institutional Structure theme has progressed well. Cambodia passed several new laws and signed bilateral and multiple agreements, such as the Biosafety Protocol.

Good progress has been noted under the Quality of Life and Poverty Reduction theme, with the implementation of community-based natural resource management programs in forestry, fishery, protected areas and participatory land-use planning. The National Information Center was created to cover indigenous practices in the mountainous highlands and plains, sustainable livelihoods and climate change mitigation and adaptation. The Ministry of Planning (MOP) developed a commune database that provides sets of valuable information related to socio-economic trends that are useful for the Cambodia poverty assessment.

Overall, good progress has been made in the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP, but with many limitations due to insufficient financial resources and the fact that most of the research activities were externally driven. These and many other constraints encountered during the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP should be addressed in the updated NBSAP.

3.2

Status of biodiversity as a result of the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP

The 2002 NBSAP provided a starting point to enhance biodiversity understanding and management of Cambodia‟s biodiversity. As below there may have been some areas of positive improvement and progress as a result of implementation but far more is needed before a real understanding of Cambodia‟s Biodiversity status can be made. It is difficult to make any direct correlation between the NBSAP and Biodiversity Status. This section seeks to identify some of the current knowledge around from Cambodia‟s 2001 and 2016 National Biodiversity Status Reports.

In response to commitments under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), a National Biodiversity Status Report (NBSR) was developed in 2001 to provide a context through stocktaking and assessment of Cambodia‟s Biodiversity. This, the first, NBSR for Cambodia was captured the areas of biodiversity values; plant and animal genetic resources, species diversity; ecosystem diversity; and ecosystem diversity including agricultural, aquatic, forest, and coastal diversities. The NBSR has been slightly modified and updated in 2015-2016, and below this data has been summarized.

GENETIC DIVERSITY: The first NBSR (2001) provided a very broad overview of genetic diversity in Cambodia and highlighted the potential significance of genetics in agricultural diversity for domestic plants and animals and also wild relatives of some domesticated plants and animals. There was limited in-situ and ex-situ works on genetic diversity in 2001 and while this is still low there are some areas of improvement. However, based on updated information in NBSR 2016, there is a positive trend toward increased understanding of genetic diversity and the importance for conservation, although domestic and commercial plants and animals are still limited used. The initial status of plant genetic diversity was derived from the FAO Status of Plant Genetic Resources (2000). In-situ conservation was considered non-existent and the only known ex-situ resources were 2557 accessions of local rice germplasm held by the International Rice Research Institute in the Phillipines. The updated status was drawn from the CARDI report Conservation and Utilization of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture in Cambodia‟ (2011), showed that there were now ex-sit resources in country has increased including, 3313 accessions (ex-situ at CADRI) and Kbal Koh Vegetable Research Station and has some in-situ conservation. There are also plans for herbaria and botanical gardens (links with Kew gardens). The first status of animal genetic diversity drew on the FAO Domestic Animal Diversity Information System (1998) and Domestic Livestock report by Maclean (1998), highlighted the presence of 4 Cattle species, 3 Pigs, Buffalo, Horse, Goat, Chicken, Duck, Goose, and Turkey. Wild relatives were also identified including: wild cattle, water buffalo, boar and the Red Jungle Fowl, the wild chicken. The „Environmental Animal Health Monitoring Initiative‟ (RUA/FAO 2011), was referred to in the update and has reinforced some of the previous status information for domestic animals. In regards to conservation, DNA Sampling of 69 crocodiles in captivity to identify the pure Fish-eating Hill Crocodile (C. siamensis) crocodiles has had positive results: 34 Siamese, 32 Hybrid with Estuarine, and 3 Hybrid with Cuban. Fecal DNA studies of wild elephants have been used to estimate a population 400-600 elephants in Cambodia. The most positive trend is the innovative use of DNA for crocodile and elephant research, but need more research on commercial animals and wild relatives.

SPECIES DIVERSITY: Initial status findings provided a very broad overview of species diversity in Cambodia with some chapters directly from relevant specialists. There were few actual species list available to compare with, therefore a significant increases in species knowledge, with increased capacity and research provided a more comprehensive species list. While more is known about species in Cambodia, new species are still being found and there are significant gaps in invertebrate and plant species knowledge: the table below shows more comprehensive species lists have been compiled.

Plant Diversity: The first NBSR (2001) can‟t provide record of Cambodia plant species due to there was no enough evidence of scientific study and research have been conducted. Although, there were 2308 seed plant has been known in NBSR (2001). In regards to the current status Forestry Administration staff worked to compile a more thorough list of known plant species for Cambodia. Some data on plants through a Forestry Administration and Korean project is still being processed, but may provide a significant increase in documented plant species for Cambodia. Little is known about the status of plant species while Siamese Rosewood and other luxury timbers have been heavily targeted and are likely to be in decline. The current update status shown a positive trend toward increasing the plant knowledge and there are 3113 plant species currently listed for Cambodia.

Invertebrate Diversity: The original section on invertebrates of NBSP (2001) focused on aquatic macro-invertebrates. This provided some understanding of some of the major freshwater macro-aquatic invertebrate families but further highlighted the lack of invertebrate data for Cambodia. The current status of invertebrates while still weak is an improvement on the past although a range of work from national and international in-country specialists have been reviewed. The current status is trended toward an increasing understanding of invertebrate species, however this is the most significant gap area for species. There are 671 invertebrates currently listed for Cambodia.

Amphibian and Reptile Diversity: Amphibian and reptile were not well study and lack of capacity to conduct scientific research on its classification have lead to unknown nor record list of theses Cambodian species, therefore the NBSR (2001) is only able to record 28 reptiles in the commercial list. With ongoing support, the research on Amphibians and Reptiles has been ably continued by the Ministry of Environment staff, including the identification of several species new to science and/or Cambodia, . the trend for reptile and amphibian species understanding is positive and has also been assisted by Fisheries staff work on sea turtles. In regards to amphibians a guide has been developed and a reptile guide is currently underway. Optimistically, there is also a trend toward the release of key reptile species back into the wild. As part of the Cambodia Crocodile Conservation Project, Phnom Tamao Wildlife and Rescue Centre and Fauna Flora International have released Fish-eating Hill Crocodiles (Crocodylus siamensis), while the Fisheries Administration have worked with Conservation International to release Cantor's softshell turtle, (Pelochelys cantorii) and with the Wildlife Conservation Society have released the Southern River Terrapin (Batagur affinis) back to the wild. With this significant improvement of knowledge and government efforts with cooperation from national and international organization, there are 72 amphibians and 173 reptiles currently listed for Cambodia.

Fish Diversity: A non-technical section on fish, which sought to give an overview of knowledge on fish species status in Cambodia for the 2001 NBSR. There was no delineation made between freshwater and marine species but it was noted that more data was available for freshwater fish species. The Fisheries Administration has worked with World Fish and IFReDI in developing a comprehensive fish species list for Cambodia. The first version of NBSR (2001) was able to record 486 freshwater fish and 357 marine species in Cambodia. There are growing concerns that the trend in reducing fish species diversity is a sign of unsustainable harvest and potentially a tipping point for the fishery. Furthermore, there is a trend toward increased damming of the upstream Mekong and its tributaries, which could further impact fish species diversity as stream flows and migration routes are altered. As highlighted in Cambodia‟s Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Government has taken quite strong action, by removing the previous fishing concessions on the Tonle Sap Lake while also promoting aquaculture and community fisheries. This is a positive trend showing the Government‟s commitment on biodiversity conservation for sustainable use and has acknowledged the significance of the fishery to the people and is acting to better manage the resource. Therefore based on scientific research and specialist, fish diversity in Cambodia, across both fresh and salt water systems are recorded in 1357 species.

Bird Diversity: The first NBSR section on birds was developed by staff from the Wildlife Conservation Society. The current NBSR section on birds has been linked to "The Birds of Cambodia: An Annotated Checklist" (Goes 2013), which is a significant biodiversity resource for Cambodia. Protection of breeding colonies and nests has been part of the successful approach to conservation used at Prek Toal and in the northern plains, but has not worked in other sites. The recent decision to abolish all fishing concessions within the Tonle Sap could also undermine over ten years of successful conservation efforts through unrestricted access to flooded forest areas formerly protected for commercial fishing had led to increased disturbance and resurgence of egg and chick collection. In addition to these setbacks, bird conservation actions must increasingly encounter new challenges. Rapid development has shifted threats from local and species-focused issues to those associated with landscape-level changes. The latter come in various forms (e.g., grassland conversion to rice cultivation; the leasing of large forest areas for commercial plantations; and the construction of hydroelectric dams), but invariably create large-scale threats to habitats and the wildlife those habitats support. Birds seem to be the most well researched of the species lists, but even recently a new species was identified in Phnom Penh. There are 601 bird species currently listed for Cambodia, with 7 on the new global Evolutionally Distinct and Globally Endangered (EDGE) list, while NBSR (2001) presented only around 500 bird has been recorded.

Mammal Diversity: The first NBSR (2001) separated terrestrial and marine mammals, and the report noted only around 100 mammals were recorded. This section was a mix between providing a basic understanding of mammals, while also providing some information of their status at the time. The previous mammal data, which includes the now questionable K‟Ting Vor, place greater importance on setting an agreed national mammal list. New mammal species are still being uncovered in Cambodia, and Fauna Flora International staff helped to highlight some of the specialist work on bats, for which 72 species have now been identified, which is more than the total for mammals in 2001. There have been significant mammal finds since 2001, which seem likely to continue, but with fewer new mammal species expected. In 2008, a Wildife Conservation Society survey of the Seima Protected Forest identified previously unknown and internationally significant populations of black-shanked doucs and yellow-cheeked crested gibbons. While there has been important mammal research it has not been systematically collected and has not been effectively shared among relevant stakeholders. The decline in Dugong and River Dolphins are concerning indicators for marine mammals in Cambodia. There is a need for classification standards and national discussions around the mammal list including potential extinctions such as Kouprey. The current status of mammal diversity in Cambodia, across both terrestrial and marine systems includes 162 species.

No. Species Data Collected Overall % 2016 2001 2016

1 Plants 2308 3113 50.5%

2 Invertebrates no record 671 11%

3 Amphibians no record 72 1%

4 Reptiles 28 for commercial 173 3%

5 Fishes 843 1357 22%

6 Birds around 500 601 10%

7 Mammals Around 100 162 2.5%

Total 6149

ECOSYSTEM SUMMARY: The 2001 NBSR provided a broad overview of ecosystem diversity, but due to lack of data there was more emphasis on the theory than actual status of agricultural, wetland, forest, and coastal ecosystems. In the absence of hard data, the previous status report developed the initial concepts of ecosystem services. The improving national land-use mapping greatly assists an overview of ecosystems but this is limited due to the lack of agreed definitions, and limited research. The Ministry of Environment has started to highlight ecosystems and their services, but this is still as a major gap area. Furthermore, within the ecosystems there are smaller habitats such as Karst areas of high biodiversity potential, but these are vulnerable to disturbance. As a generalized statement, the overall trend in ecosystems has seen a shift toward more human use of ecosystems: increasing agricultural, commercial and extactive use.

The National Biodiversity Status reports seek to identify the status and current trends for Cambodia‟s Biodiversity. With the time and resources available only an overview is possible but from the data collected it is clear that there is now growing understanding of Cambodia‟s biodiversity, but still significant gaps in data and coordination. There are some individuals that mostly through their own passion have greatly helped to provide a clearer picture of Cambodia‟s diversity. New programs such as the RUPP Masters in Conservation, Centre for Biodiversity Conservation and the Cambodian Journal of Natural History are very positive developments. This data needs to be better consolidated and shared within Government in support of biodiversity management; the Clearing House Mechanism and National Biodiversity Status Report Update should help with this.

There is difficulty in stating biodiversity trends as the current and previous data-sets for species numbers provide some broad ideas about what might be happening rather than specific trends. Overall, while data is still deficient there is a positive trend in greater understanding of species, but how they function together as part of an ecosystem and their services is poorly known. As stated in Cambodia‟s Fifth National Report to the CBD, all habitats are being negatively impacted and as such there may also be negative impact on ecosystem services, the diversity of species and genetic diversity. More strategic, consolidating and collaborative, rather than ad-hoc and isolated, research, and actions are needed for Cambodia‟s biodiversity status to be better understood.

In conclusion, the NBSR (2016) update has highlighted some progress, which may be related to actions proposed in the previous NBSAP (2002). In regards to genetic diversity there can be seen to be a significant increase in Cambodia‟s ownership and understanding in plant genetic diversity, and with the support of international partners modern use of DNA is assisting in animal genetic diversity conservation efforts. As per the table above there is a positive trend toward increased species numbers across all sectors, even surpassing some of the estimates made in the 2001 NBSR. Significantly, species information is also being more widely shared through the Government‟s Biodiversity Clearing House Mechanism. The ecosystem summary showed that this sector needs more support but increased ecosystem services attention and more landscape-based activities are hoped to support increased ecosystem understanding. Overall, there has been some progress and through this NBSAP the Royal Government of Cambodia hopes to continue to strengthen biodiversity understanding and management.

IV.

NATIONAL ACTIONS  FOR IMPLEMENTING THE OVERALL OBJECTIVES

OF THE NBSAP: THEMATIC APPROACH

The 2002 NBSAP used a sectoral approach to identify the priority actions required for achieving the vision, mission and strategic objectives of the strategy. Seventeen themes were identified according to the sectors in which the Cambodian society is involved. The 2009 National Sustainable Development Strategy partly used a similar approach while considering the strategic areas for sustainable development in Cambodia. However, even if the sectoral approach was selected as a practical way to develop and implement the NBSAP, it was recognized that biodiversity, being cross-sectoral, would have many areas of overlap among the themes, and that these overlaps were to be considered more as complementary rather than as reasons for unnecessary duplication in implementation. In this updated NBSAP, opportunities for synergies in implementation of the various themes have been highlighted.

The fifth National Report submitted in 2014 under the Convention on Biological Diversity summarizes some of the key activities achieved in implementing Cambodia‟s 2002 NBSAP. Both reports conclude that, overall, the 2002 NBSAP has only partially been implemented. In addition, an assessment of the implementation of the priority actions contained in the 2002 NBSAP was carried out in the framework of the review, as was the updating of the NBSAP, as reported in Section 3.1 above.

GROUP 1: PROTECTION OF BIODIVERSITY (Themes 1 to 8) Theme 1: Protected Area System

1. Background

Under this theme, the 2002 NBSAP lists a number of issues in relation to the protection of biodiversity. There are 11 strategic objectives and related indicators, as well as 11 priority actions. The assessment of the achievement of these priority actions indicates that:

(a) Each of the issues identified in 2002 has been addressed and each of the strategic objectives and priority actions has been undertaken.

(b) Progress was recognized in the establishment of Community Protected Areas, the demarcation of some protected areas and the conservation or restoration of biologically important habitats/ecosystems/landscapes, especially mangroves, coral reefs and sea grass. Four Ramsar sites have been designated, as well as the Tonle Sap Biosphere reserve and a number of Important Bird Areas. Community Protected Areas, Fisheries and Forestry have been increasingly promoted.

(c) The country has also adopted a number of laws and established goals and plans of relevance to the Protected Area System. These include the following (see Annex 1 for a more detailed list):

(i) The 2008 Protected Area Law, which defines the framework of management, conservation and development of protected areas under the administration of MOE, and which is also relevant to conservation areas under MAFF;

(ii) The National Strategic Development Plan, and its Update 2009-2013. In Chapter IV (Key Policy Priorities and Actions: 2009-2013), the Plan contains policy priorities that support the establishment of protected areas and protected forests with the objectives, among others, to conserve biodiversity, improve the livelihoods of people living in rural areas and contribute to economic growth;

(iii) Chapters 4, 5 and 6 in the 2006 Law on Fisheries present approaches to protect and conserve fisheries in inland and marine waters, in general, and more specifically in inundated forests and mangrove forests;

(iv) Article 23 of the 2007 Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of Cambodia states that when a watershed is degraded by human activities or natural causes, the MOWRAM has the authority to declare it a protected "water use" zone;

(v) The 2002 Forestry Law, which defines the framework for management, harvesting, use, development and conservation of the forests in the Kingdom of Cambodia. The objective of this law is to ensure sustainable management of these forests for their social, economic and environmental benefit, including conservation of biological diversity and cultural heritage. The management of forests are under the general jurisdiction of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF). The areas of Forest Protection and all kinds of wildlife species are under the management, research and conservation of the Forestry Administration, except for fish and animal that breed in water;

(d) MOE and MAFF have collaborated with development partners and natural resource management and environmental NGOs to support conservation efforts in protected areas and other conservation areas;

(e) While terrestrial protected areas have reached about 26% of the country‟s land area and 8 fish sanctuaries have been established, no national marine protected area has yet been officially designated. However the MOE has plans to conduct a feasibility study on the establishment of marine protected areas in Koh Rong and the coastal areas around Sihanouk Ville. There is, moreover, the need to (i) develop or update management plans and ensure implementation of those plans for effectiveness in protected areas and other conservation areas; (ii) integrate those areas into wider landscapes and seascapes; and (iii) ensure the contributions of each of those areas to the national economy and the well-being of all, especially local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities;

(f) Cambodia has seven ecoregions that occur entirely or partly within its borders including: (i) Tonle Sap freshwater swamp forests, (ii) Tonle Sap-Mekong peat swamp forests, (iii) Central Indochina dry forests, (iv) Cardamom Mountains rain forests, (v) Indochina mangroves, (vi) Southeastern Indochina dry evergreen forests, and (vii) Southern Annamites montane rain forests. Based on the

August 2014 WDPA data,

each of these ecoregions has been afforded between 20% and 62% protection status, except the Tonle Sap-Mekong peat

swamp forests, of which only 0.6% is protected. More than 90% of those swamp forests have

been converted to scrub or degraded forests. Intensive agriculture and the alteration of the

hydrodynamics of the river systems in the region have altered the natural river fluctuations,

adversely affecting the remaining native vegetation. Protection of this ecoregion has to be extended. In addition, most Important Bird Areas (IBA) are covered by protected areas, although the following IBA sites are in critical condition due to agricultural expansion and intensification, human intrusions and disturbances, energy production and mining, overexploitation of some species and, in particular, wood harvesting and collection of non-timber products: Kampong Trach, Lomphat, Sesan River, Stung / Chi Kreng / Kampong Svay and Western Siem Pang. Only 0.2% of the Gulf of Thailand, a large marine ecosystem is protected, and there is a need to expand protection as a matter of priority.

(g) Despite the conservation measures taken, many species continue to be threatened and climate change has already started to cause species range shifts, often across national borders;

(h) Limited financial resources and local/national expertise were identified as the primary causes of limited implementation of the 2002 NBSAP objectives relating to protected areas. A lack of awareness of the values of protected areas and conservation areas, including of their potential as sources of revenue, has also limited the allocation of budgets, human resources and equipment to the implementation of recommended actions.

Currently, the network of 23 protected areas, under the management of the Ministry of Environment (MOE) through its General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protection (GDANCP), 6 protected forests and 8 fish sanctuaries, under the management of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) through the Forest Administration (FA) and Fisheries Administration (FiA) respectively covers about 26% of the country‟s land area.

Cambodia‟s protected area system is under considerable pressure. There are obstacles to the establishment of new protected areas and conservation areas, and some of the designated protected areas and conservation areas are ineffective, particularly because of the lack of management plans, as well as shortages in skilled staff and insufficient budget allocations.

In accordance with chapter V of the 2008 Protected Area Law, the GDANCP started work in 2013 on the national strategic management plan expected to guide the development of action plans for individual protected areas and other conservation areas. As a first step, the GDANCP developed a framework that contained, among other elements, guiding principles and links to other government priorities. One of the objectives of the framework is to allow coherence in the implementation of sectoral policies and plans, bearing in mind the diversity in the ecological types and governance of individual protected areas and other conservation areas.

In August and September 2013, representatives of the different departments of the Ministry of the Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, and representatives of local communities and of partner international and non-governmental organizations participated in drafting the strategic framework that was adopted by the National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC) on 18 February 2014. In addition to considerations regarding the development and implementation of protected area and other conservation area management plans, the strategic framework also incorporates aspects that contribute to making protected areas and other conservation areas in Cambodia a comprehensive system that is fully resilient to present and future pressures, including in particular, climate change, and that may ensure an effective and efficient protection of the country‟s natural capital and its provision of ecosystem services. This framework is the basis of the strategic objectives and key actions, which are identified, in this updated NBSAP.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified for consideration in this updated NBSAP:

Regarding knowledge base (a) Limited information to support decision-making, including on climate change, its present and future impacts and experience with climate change ecosystem-based mitigation;

(b) Climate change according to the 2007 assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is one of the principal threats to biodiversity and the functioning of protected areas and conservation areas;

(c) Lack of research and monitoring capacity to provide regular assessment of status and trends of biodiversity and to follow up on threatened species and trends in the level of threats.

In relation to progress in implementing plans:

(a) Limited or ineffective programmes on raising awareness about the role and importance of protected areas and other conservation areas as well as their functions;

(b) Field management and patrolling problems associated with insufficient resources and rangers;

(c) Unclear or incomplete zoning and boundary demarcations;

(d) Increasing pressures on protected areas and other conservation areas as a result of increasing population, global trading that often leads to overharvesting of natural resources (e.g., in term of high-priced timber species and non-timber forest products), road-building, unmanaged tourism, urbanization, other infrastructure development, and expansion in forestry, agriculture (shifting agriculture, land encroachment) and fisheries;

(e) Illegal activities such as illegal logging, fishing, hunting and harvesting of flooded forests; wildlife poaching and ill-conceived expansion in some cases of large-scale agro-industrial land encouraged by the country‟s land concession policies;

(f) Conflicts with local populations.

Regarding the enabling environment

(a) Weak legal underpinnings (e.g., uncertainties in land tenure), institutional frameworks and law enforcement;

(b) Lack of planning (management plans);

(c) Limited participation, cooperation and coordination with local communities and relevant stakeholders, including in sectors other than biodiversity;

(d) Social and political constraints;

(e) Lack of financial resources for effective management of protected areas, for the recovery and protection of threatened species, and for establishing and maintaining ex-situ conservation facilities;

(f) Lack of adequate technical expertise and human resources.

These issues are essentially the same as those recorded in 2002, although most of them have begun to be addressed, especially after the adoption of the 2008 Protected Area Law that provides some guidance on requirements. The Government has also recently adopted the National Protected Area System Strategic Management Framework (NPASSMF), which contains guidance on managing protected areas and other conservation areas as a system rather than as single separate areas that must "survive" on their own. The NPASSMF precedes the development of the national strategic management plan that is stipulated in chapter V of the 2008 Protected Area Law and links to other government priorities. The Framework was developed to enhance coherence in the implementation of sectoral policies and plans of relevance to the conservation of biodiversity. The national strategic management plan is expected to guide the development of action plans for individual protected areas and conservation areas in the country.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues:

(a) Strategic Objective 1: Strengthen the knowledge of the national protected area system for decision-making by conducting assessments, enhancing understanding, organizing and disseminating information, and raising awareness of the functions, roles, values and requirements of species in-situ conservation, protected areas and/or other conservation areas throughout Cambodia;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Accelerate the implementation of Cambodia‟s obligations in compliance with Aichi Biodiversity Target 11 and other relevant targets of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 as they have been translated in this National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan14. Particular efforts should be made to achieve those goals that are lagging behind in the implementation of the programme of work on protected areas adopted under the Convention on Biological Diversity and relevant commitments made in the country‟s plan of action on protected areas. Implementation of this strategic objective will take into account the Sustainable Development Goals that the country will adopt and other conventions ratified by Cambodia, including, in particular, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the World Heritage Convention and the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment through diversified governance, enhanced participation, increased coordination and cooperation among stakeholders at the national, regional and global levels, and enhanced human, institutional, technological and sustainable financial capacities.

Implementation of actions under this theme on the "Protected Area System" will be in coordination with, and strengthened by actions under other themes addressing landscape and seascape planning and management, and will be guided by the ecosystem approach (themes under Group 1 on "Protection of Biodiversity") and the principles for the sustainable use of natural resources (themes under Group 2 on "Sustainable use of Biodiversity"). The Protected Area System theme will also respond to the requirement for the protection of natural habitats and the protection and recovery of threatened species. It will also be particularly relevant to ecosystem restoration activities. Actions relating to the strengthening of the enabling environment for the Protected Area System are described in detail under the themes in Group 3 on "Enabling environment". Each of the actions listed in Table 5 is required, as well, for the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Target 8 and is relevant to the implementation of many other targets, particularly those concerned with enhanced management of biological resources and conservation of ecosystems under anthropogenic pressures.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

27

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their implementation under the theme on "P

rotected A

re

Strategic objectives

1.1 C onduct assessm ents on im portant aspects of protected areas and conservation areas, including their coverage and location; the ecological gaps in their representativeness; their values and im portance; their connectivity and integration into w ider landscapes and seascapes; their governance system s, w hether m anagem ent is governed by plans that have been adopted, the effectiveness and equity of their m anagem ent; their capacity requirem ents, threats and barriers to their effective m anagem ent; their environm ental and biodiversity policy environm ent and the sustainability of their finances. In particular, conduct econom ic evaluations and assessm ents of resources for the potential developm ent of revenue-based activities w ithin protected areas, including ecotourism developm ent in protected areas and buffer zone m anagem ent w ith com m unity benefits. 1.2 Enhance understanding and organize into user-friendly databases the inform ation on the functions, roles, values and requirem ents of protected areas and other conservation areas, considered individually and as a system in C am bodia. 1.3 Ensure that inform ation of relevance to decision-m aking is w idely accessible and that it raises aw areness. Bearing in mind the need to: (a) A chieve conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services w ithin the national protected area system , rehabilitation of degraded protected areas and other conservation areas or degraded zones w ithin those areas, prevention and suppression of illegal activities and invasive alien species, and sustainable use of natural resources and ecosystem services w ithin individual protected areas and other conservation areas in line w ith A rticle 16.1 of the 2008 Protected A rea Law and other relevant law s, including, in particular, the Forestry Law and the Fisheries Law ; and (b) Enhance the contributions of protected areas and conservation areas, considered individually or as a system , to the im plem entation of C am bodia‟s sustainable developm ent goals, especially, poverty reduction and eradication. Key actions

ajective 1: the knowledge of the national protected  for decision-making by conducting , enhancing understanding, organizing and g inform

ation and raising aw

areness of the les, values and requirem

ents of species in-situ , protected areas and/or conservation areas

am bodia.

[M T

M T

M G jective 2: the implementation of Cambod

ia's  in com

pliance w

ith A ichi B

iodiversity Target relevant targets of the Strategic Plan for 2011-2020 as they have been translated in l B

iodiversity Strategy and A

ction Plan. forts should be m

ade to achieve those goals ing behind in the im

plem entation of the of w

ork on protected areas adopted under the on B

iological D

iversity and relevant ts m

ade in the country‟s plan of action on eas. Im

plem entation of this strategic objective o account the Sustainable D

evelopm

ent G oals

National Biodiversity Strategy and

28

ntry w

ill adopt and other conventions ratified ia, including in particular the U

nited N

ations C

onvention on C

lim

ate C

hange, the W

orld nvention and the R

am sar C

onvention on

2.6 Integrate protected areas into w ider landscapes and seascapes, and strengthen and create transboundary protected areas, also bearing in m ind clim ate change 2.5 Ensure connectivity am ong protected areas through corridors and/or stepping stones, bearing in m ind the ecosystem approach 2.4 Ensure equity in decision-m aking processes and benefit sharing w ith special attention to the m ost vulnerable group. 2.3 Enhance m anagem ent effectiveness and efficiency and, in particular, strengthen the ongoing m anagem ent of designated protected areas by developing and enforcing m anagem ent policies, guidelines and plans, and ensure that protected areas im plem ent a C onservation A ssured approach. 2.2 Identify and create new protected areas and/or other new conservation areas, including: (i) A reas of particular national, regional or global im portance for biodiversity and the delivery of ecosystem services, w ith a particular focus on areas that are naturally resilient to clim ate change and that can serve as refugia to species that w ill be m isplaced by clim ate change in the future; (ii) A reas that are considered to be part of the country‟s natural and cultural heritage; and (iii) Ecologically representative areas. In particular, identify and designate new protected areas w ithin w etlands, and m arine and coastal habitats. W hile the creation of new protected areas and other conservation areas shall be considered only w hen the gap analysis has clearly dem onstrated a critical need, enhancem ent of m anagem ent effectiveness and efficiency (action 2.3) is am ong the priority actions. 2.1 M aintain and, as required, rehabilitate existing protected areas, other conservation areas and the entire national protected area system ; It is essential to develop and im plem ent an action plan for each protected area, each conservation area, and the entire netw ork of protected areas and other conservation areas in C am bodia that w ill include, inter alia, w ays and m eans to:

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

National Biodiversity Strategy and

29

3.6 Enhance technological capacities, as w ell as the m echanism s for technology acquisition, adaptation and transfer. 3.5 R eview and am end legislations related to natural resources m anagem ent to ensure the list of protected species m irrors the IU C N R ed List threat categories. 3.4 Enhance institutional and legislative capacities, and strengthen and interconnect protected area law enforcem ent efforts at the local, regional and national levels. 3.3 Enhance hum an capacities. A s a m atter of priority, conduct training program s targeted for park rangers, technical staff, protected areas directors, local com m unities, indigenous ethnic m inorities and other stakeholders 3.2 Increase coordination and cooperation am ong stakeholders at the national, regional and global levels 3.1 Enhance participation and diversify governance 2.8 Im plem ent additional specific provisions from relevant regional and international agreem ents. 2.7 Integrate protected areas and other conservation areas w ithin sector strategies and policies and w ider plans and program m es, including R educing Em issions from D eforestation and Forest D egradation "plus" (R ED D +), other paym ents for ecosystem services (PES), environm ental im pact assessm ents (EIA ), and strategies or policies for nature-based tourism , forestry, fisheries, agriculture, energy, transportation, clim ate change, green econom y and C am bodia‟s sustainable developm ent goals. A s a m atter of priority, integrate the m anagem ent of the Tonle Sap B iosphere C ore Zones w ith the m anagem ent of the w hole Tonle Sap B iosphere R eserve, using the ecosystem approach and the principles for sustainable use of biological diversity. Incorporate m anagem ent of biosphere reserves, com m unity fisheries m anagem ent, boundary dem arcation, com m ercial fisheries m anagem ent, w ildlife and fisheries m onitoring, land security, cross-institutional com m unication and coordination, field staff and com m unity training program , environm ental education and aw areness, and local governance. The inviolate core zone in the M ondulkiri Protected Forest needs to be clearly dem arcated.

M M C

M

M jective 3: the enabling environment through overnance, enhanced participation, increased and cooperation am

ong stakeholders at the ional and global levels, and enhanced hum

an, , technological and sustainable financial

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

National Biodiversity Strategy and

30

3.10 Enhance sustainable financing capacities. 3.9 Enhance the participation of local com m unities and local authorities in the planning, design and m anagem ent of the country‟s protected area system . 3.8 R esearch and support the establishm ent and m anagem ent of new com m unity protected areas. 3.7 Enhance flora and fauna research w ithin protected areas.

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

The 2002 NBSAP identified three strategic objectives and four priority actions that are on-going under theme 2 on threatened species. MOE and MAFF are collaborating with development partners and environmental NGOs on a range of relevant biodiversity related programmes, including "endangered species action plans", the establishment of a Southern Cardamom Biodiversity (elephant) Corridor, "Mekong Giant Catfish and Dolphin protection programmes," "Development of Elephant Conservation Action Plan," "Cambodia Crocodile Conservation Action Plan," and "Tiger Action Plan: Monitoring of Tigers and their Prey". The implementation of the strategic objectives under this theme has only been partial because of limited government capacity and resources, financial resources, trained plant and animal taxonomists, technical support and awareness-raising programmes.

2.

Issues

The following issues have been identified as the most critical:

(a) Lack of qualified plant and animal taxonomists;

(b) Absence of comprehensive data covering all groups of animals and plants;

(c) Insufficient support from decision-makers and inadequate financial resources; and

(d) Methodological difficulties including, especially, data acquisition and management.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address these issues:

(a) Strategic objective 1: Improve the knowledge of the threatened species status and trends;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors threatening species and ways and means to address species‟ threatened status; and

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for addressing threatened species.

Several actions described under the other themes, including Theme 1 on "protected areas system and in-situ conservation", Theme 3 on "ex-situ conservation" and Theme 6 on "land-use planning and management of biological resources", will contribute to the protection and recovery of threatened species. The actions that are highlighted in Table 6 are required to meet the Cambodia Biodiversity Target in which all species of threatened fauna and flora will have to be identified and their status improved significantly by 2020. These actions will contribute to the achievement of Target 4 regarding aquatic threatened species as well.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

32

actions and relevant m

inistries as w

ell as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "T

hreatened S

Strategic Objectives

2.3 D evelop and im plem ent program m es for the prevention of the introduction and establishm ent of invasive alien species threatening other species and for the control of their spread as w ell as their eradication. 2.2 D evelop and im plem ent plans and program m es for the recovery of threatened species and their reintroduction. A particular em phasis should be on critically endangered vertebrates am ong the A sian Species A ction Partnership species in C am bodia. 2.1 C onduct research on drivers of, essentially pressures on, the com ponents of biodiversity, including invasive alien species, habitat fragm entation and degradation, overexploitation, pollution, clim ate change and natural disasters. C onsider in particular the status and evolution of species vulnerability in the face of clim ate change. 1.4 B uild and strengthen technical capacities of taxonom ists and para-taxonom ists associated w ith plant and anim al taxonom y. 1.3 A ssess ecological and socioeconom ic consequences of the loss of species. 1.2 C onduct basic and applied research for better understanding and im proved know ledge of the status, trends and dynam ics of the com ponents of biodiversity and organize that inform ation into databases and through the national clearinghouse m echanism . 1.1 A ssess the current status of biodiversity at the genetic, species/ population/ com m unity, and ecosystem /habitat levels, especially in protected areas and protected forest, Im portant B ird A reas (IB A ) and K ey B iodiversity A reas (K B A ), and apply IU C N R ed List criteria to produce a national red lists. Key Actions

Coopmbjective 1: e knowledge of the threatened species status

M A F

M A FG SSD

M A F

M O E

G SSD M O Ejective 2: d describe the direct and indirect factors  species and ways and means to address eatened status.

M A F

G SSD M O E

G SSD M O E

National Biodiversity Strategy an

33

3.6 Strengthen law enforcem ent and practices that are favourable to threatened species. 3.5 Ensure protected areas supporting threatened species are effectively m anaged and resourced. 3.4 D evelop practical plans for m obilizing financial resources and expertise on threatened species. 3.3 Integrate threatened species issues in training program m es for staff and in education curriculum s and enhance public aw areness of threatened species. 3.2 Strengthen cooperation for technology transfer (e.g. on biogeographical m apping technologies, population distribution, biotechnology), including access to traditional know ledge and resources. 3.1 D evelop program m es for m onitoring threatened species. 2.5 Establish ex situ conservation facilities including zoos, botanical gardens, germ plasm conservation facilities and D N A G ene-banks. 2.4 R ehabilitate and restore degraded ecosystem s/habitats for the recovery and reestablishm ent of threatened species.

G SSD M O E

G SSD M O Eic objective 3: hen the enabling environment for addressing ed species.

M A F

and M

M A FG SSD

M A FG SSD

M A FG SSD

M O EG SSD

M A F

G SSD

Under this theme, the 2002 NBSAP had three strategic objectives and four priority actions. MoE and MAFF had a leading role in these actions: they identified and collected plant species and cultivars requiring protection, they established a National Botanical Garden and a general herbarium, and they strengthened capacity in wildlife husbandry techniques for use in the Phnom Tamao Wildlife Rescue Centre, other ex-situ conservation areas and private zoological parks.

Following the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the Phnom Tamao Zoological Park and Wildlife Rescue Centre and private zoos, as well as the Cambodian herbarium of the Royal University of Phnom Penh were established in the country. MOE and MAFF continued conserving existing plant genetic resources in gene banks, greenhouses and on-farm, as well as the collection of insect species infesting crops. These ex-situ collections were established not only to conserve species and their genetic heritage in a suitable environment, but also to contribute to public awareness of the importance of biodiversity and to raise funds for conservation projects. They also provide material for scientific research.

The establishment of a national herbarium is underway, but ongoing ex situ conservation activities require additional financial and human resources.

2.

Issues

The primary factors identified as delaying the achievement of the objectives under this theme include: the lack of adequate infrastructure and qualified staff, insufficient funds, scientific data and research finding evidence.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following objectives have been identified to address these issues:

(a) Strategic Objective 1: Develop and strengthen ex situ conservation areas and facilities. It is stated in the preamble of the CBD text that the fundamental requirement for the conservation of biological diversity is the in-situ conservation of ecosystems and natural habitats and the maintenance and recovery of viable populations of species in their natural surroundings. Since ex-situ conservation measures and facilities complement in-situ conservation, this theme is complementary to Theme 1 on protected area and in-situ conservation, and the actions that are listed in Table 7 will contribute to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 1, 5, 10, 19 and 20;

(b) Strategic Objective 2: Recover species and populations. Reintroduction of captive-bred species to re-establish populations of endangered or rare plants and animals in the original habitat is necessary;

(c) Strategic Objective 3: Building capacity for the establishment and maintenance of the National Botanical Garden, National Herbarium, Aquarium, and other ex-situ conservation areas.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

35

actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "Ex-situ

C

onse

Strategic Objectives

1.1 Establish a N ational B otanical G arden and related facilities for research and training on plants, anim als and related pests. 1.2 Establish a national herbarium and related facilities for research and training on plants 1.3 Strengthen the m anagem ent of Phnom Tam ao Zoological Park and W ildlife R escue C entre and establish related facilities for research and training. 1.4 Identify and collect plant species and cultivars requiring protection for ex- situ conservation, reproduction and propagation 1.5 A dopt m easures and establish facilities for the recovery and rehabilitation of threatened plant and anim al species in preparation for their reintroduction into their natural habitats. In particular, assess the requirem ents and develop captive breeding program s for C ritically Endangered A sian V ertebrates am ong the A sian Species A ction Partnership species in C am bodia (particularly reptiles) 1.6 D evelop and im plem ent a training program in anim al husbandry techniques for the staff of the Phnom Tam ao Zoological Park and W ildlife R escue C entre and other ex-situ conservation areas. 1.7 D evelop practical plans for m obilizing the required funds. 1.8 Explore and take m easures com bining in-situ and ex-situ conservation for species having sm all w ild populations and/or a w eak ability to survive and reproduce. 2.1 R ecover and/or m aintain endangered and rare species in ex-situ facilities. 2.2 D evelop and im plem ent reintroduction program m es to release captive-bred species back into the w ild choosing an area they inhabited historically. The objective of such program m es is to establish a new population in the original or Key Actions

Coopartici

ajective 1: strengthen ex situ conservation areas and

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,jective 2: ies and populations.

M A FF,

M A FF,

National Biodiversity Strategy and

36

sim

ilar environm

ent. 2.3 Prom

ote augm

entation program

s by releasing individuals into existing populations to increase their size and genetic diversity.

G SSD

, M 2.4 C

arry out program

s to establish anim

al or plant populations outside their historic ranges.

M A FF,

2.5 Establish gene banks for the conservation of sperm

and natural gene banks for the research and conservation of endangered species.

G SSD

, M jective 3: y for the establishment and maintenance of Botanical Garden, National Herbarium, nd other ex-situ conservation areas.

3.1 B

uild capacity of local experts for the collections and m

aintenance of ex-situ m aterials and specim

ens, including, am

ong other things, the introduction of techniques and m

ethods for plant and genetic resources conservation.

M O E, G

3.2 Enhance regional and international cooperation on scientific and technology

transfer on ex-situ conservation and m

anagem

ent.

G SSD

, M 3.3 C

ollect and dissem

inate biodiversity outreach m

aterials for the ex-situ conservation of critically endangered and threatened species.

G SSD

, M 3.4 Encourage and support young taxonom

ists in their field research and laboratory w

ork.

G SSD

, M

Theme 4: Sustainable Mining

1. Background

Mineral resources in Cambodia include bauxite, carbonate rocks, natural gas, gemstones, gold, manganese, petroleum, phosphate rock, salt, silica, and zircon. With the exception of carbonate rocks and gemstones, the country's mineral resources are largely unexploited. To attract domestic and foreign mining companies to invest in the mining sector, the government promulgated the Law on Minerals Management and Mining in 2001. The Ministry of Industry, Mines and Energy (MIME, now known as the Ministry of Mines and Energy - MME) is the main government agency that implements the country's mineral law and policy. The MME's Department of Geology and Mines and the Department of Energy are responsible for developing the country's mineral resources, providing mining assistance to the private sector, and administering mining-related regulations and inspections. In the past, various reports indicated that without strong and comprehensive mining regulations and standards, many mining operations were destroying natural ecosystems with severe impacts to downstream watercourses and the surrounding communities from water pollution that affected the overall aquatic biodiversity; this was in turn having detrimental effects on economic livelihoods and social harmony.

The 2002 NBSAP contains three strategic objectives and three priority actions relating to the exploration, extraction and processing of mineral resources. The negative impact of mining activities on biodiversity, including the destruction and pollution of habitats, partly due to a lack of adequate and environmentally friendly methods, was found as one of the main issues together with the absence of appropriate monitoring programmes.

With the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, some mining methods have been improved. The cost/benefit analysis and EIA have continued to be applied systematically, although mining activities, particularly small scale mining, still pollute and degrade natural ecosystems. Implementation of actions relating to mining in the 2002 NBSAP was supported by a number of policies and strategies including the 2001 Law on Management and Exploitation of Mineral Resources.

The Cambodian Development Council (CDC) is the government agency that grants exploration licenses to investors. If exploration is successful, investors are required to present a master project plan to the CDC before being granted a mining license. The amount of investment approved for mining projects by the CDC totaled $181 million in 200515.

In the Rio+20 Conference report, "The Future we want", the world community recognizes that "mining offers the opportunity to catalyse broad-based economic development, reduce poverty and assist countries in meeting internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, when managed effectively and properly". However "governments need strong capacities to develop, manage and regulate their mining industries, in the interest of sustainable development."

2.

Issues

The same issues identified in 2002 are still valid today, but mainly regarding illegal mining activities:

(a) Destruction and pollution of natural habitats by mining activities, particularly illegal mining activities;

(b) Lack of consideration of biodiversity protection in illegal mining activities;

(c) Lack of adequate mining methods in illegal activities;

(d) Absence of well-defined monitoring program from illegal mining.

In addition, enforcement of the 2001 Law of Minerals Management and Mining of Cambodia has not been very effective, partly due to lack of transparency:

(a) A number of mining companies carry out mining activities with licenses given only for exploration activities;

(b) An escalating number of licenses for mineral resources are being allocated to private sector investors in the absence of an adequate legal framework or environmental and social safeguards;

(c) Exploration or mining licenses have been granted on indigenous land without consulting with local communities and ethnic minority groups;

(d) Mining licenses have been allocated inside protected areas, protected forests and ecologically sensitive areas, while Chapter 8 of the 2008 Protected Area Law restricts the use of natural resources in the core and conservation zones;

(e) The high cost of restoring or rehabilitating environments that are degraded by mining is used as an excuse not to restore degraded ecosystems.

Mining can, to some extent, exemplify the issues of unsustainable production and consumption when ecosystems are destroyed, pollutants and various wastes are dumped into water streams, and energy and water resources are overused. The world community recognized, on the occasion of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 1992, that the major cause of the continued deterioration of the global environment was the unsustainable pattern of consumption and production. The challenge for all countries was then to decouple economic growth from the rising rates of natural resource use and the environmental impacts that occur in consumption and production life cycles and due to waste generation. At the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in 2002, it was acknowledged that sustainable consumption and production form one of the three overarching objectives of, and essential requirements for, sustainable development, together with poverty eradication and the management of natural resources in order to foster economic and social development. A voluntary 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns was adopted at the Rio+20 Conference.

Sustainable consumption and production is about "the use of services and related products, which respond to basic needs and bring a better quality of life while minimizing the use of natural resources and toxic materials as well as the emissions of waste and pollutants over the life cycle of the service or product so as not to jeopardize the needs of further generations"16. Sustainable consumption and production offers important contributions for the transition towards low-carbon and green economies/green growth. It requires building cooperation among different stakeholders, as well as across sectors in the countries.

The challenges posed by production and consumption are mounting as Cambodia‟s demand for natural/biological resources is increasing with population growth and demand, and with economic growth and the need for export products. The economic sectors causing the most significant environmental pressures in Cambodia are: agriculture, forestry, energy, water supply, mining, construction, food production, tourism, transport services and waste disposal. Environmental impacts of production and consumption can be reduced by using the 3-R strategy consisting of reducing resource use and waste generations, re-using resources, and recycling wastes. The strategy can be implemented through specific controls at the sites of production, use and disposal, by adopting green technologies or by transferring demand from higher to lower impact consumption categories. Policy options can include improved environmental information, certification, labeling, verification, green public procurement and market-based instruments.

The issue of sustainable production and consumption is relevant to a number of other NBSAP themes, such as agriculture and animal production (Theme 13), aquaculture (Theme 10), energy resource (Theme 14), manufacturing industry (Theme 17), quality of life and poverty reduction (Theme 22), landscape and seascape management and coordination (Theme 23) and, with more emphasis on the consumption and use aspects, to Themes 7 (Waters resources), 9 (Sustainable forest resources), 10 (Freshwater fisheries), 11 (Coastal and marine resources), 12 (Animal wildlife resources), 16 (Customary sustainable use and traditional knowledge), and 17 (Tourism). The clearing-house mechanism (Theme 24) will contain information and data on the importance of awareness-raising, education and communication (Theme 20) for production and consumption.

Specific issues relating to sustainable production and consumption in Cambodia17 include:

(a) Lack of specific laws and regulations addressing the Sustainable Consumption and Production concept especially including Cleaner Production;

(b) No significant investment on, and lack of appropriate financing mechanisms for the recycling of solid wastes, „Cleaner Production‟ or, in general, „Sustainable Consumption and Production‟;

(c) Weak recognition of „Cleaner Production‟ and „Sustainable Consumption and Production‟ in most industrial development policies;

(d) Weak institutional and technological capacity.

However, opportunities for „Sustainable Consumption and Production‟ in the country include the facts that the Green Growth Roadmap promotes „Sustainable Consumption and Production‟ activities. Furthermore, the 3-R Concept is being promoted through environmental education programmes, and a number of existing laws provide some framework for application of Sustainable Consumption and Production principles.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1: Assess the impact of mining on biodiversity components and functions, and enhance awareness about this impact and its implications for sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Develop and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen measures that will enhance the contribution of mining resources to biodiversity conservation, poverty reduction, sustainable development and the well-being of all in Cambodia;

(d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the actions identified for biodiversity-friendly mining activities.

Good planning (Theme 6) taking into account the existing laws (Theme 21), supported by the application of biodiversity-inclusive SEA and EIA, adequate landscape management measures and coordination (Theme 23), adequate management of water resources (Theme 7), and using the participatory approach involving well informed (Theme 20) local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities (Theme 19) and representatives of relevant stakeholder groups will ensure that mining activities are carried out in line with the objectives of this NBSAP.

Ensuring that mining activities are in line with the conservation of biodiversity (Group 1 themes in this NBSAP) and the sustainable use of its components (in particular the resources considered in Group 2 themes), will have a positive contribution particularly for the strategic objectives under Theme 1 on Protected Areas System, Theme 10 on Freshwater Fisheries and Aquaculture, Theme 11 on Coastal and Marine Resources and Theme 12 on Forest Resources. The implementation of the actions listed in Table 8 below will therefore contribute specifically to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Target 7, and also to many others including Targets 1 to 6, 10 to 12, 15 and 16. These actions will also contribute to the achievement of the NSDS 2030 vision that Cambodia should, by 2030, have "abundant mineral resources and a sustainable mining sector that is exploiting minerals without destruction of nearby human settlements and landscapes, and without causing serious health and environmental impacts; and which economizes the scarce mineral resources and promotes recycling of metals".

National Biodiversity Strategy an

40

actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "Sustainable M

Strategic Objectives

2.5 A ssess the im pact on biodiversity of (authorized or unauthorized) m ining w ithin protected areas and conservation areas 2.4 Explore and prom ote alternatives to m ining in term s of land and resource use, based on the result of land-use planning and sustainable financing options. These options could include ecotourism , carbon storage credits under the R ED D + fram ew ork, and endow m ents 2.3 Investigate w hether environm ental and social im pact assessm ents w ere m ade in existing m ines and w hether the results w ere taken into account to halt detrim ental activities or com pensate for negative im pacts on biodiversity/environm ent; 2.2 Study the feasibility, costs and benefits of correcting existing m ining industries for environm ental soundness 2.1 Integrate biodiversity protection considerations in m ining activities essentially through the application of (i) the V oluntary G uidelines on B iodiversity-Inclusive Im pact A ssessm ent (C B D D ecision V III/28 also adopted by the R am sar C onvention) and (ii) the A kw é: K on V oluntary guidelines for the conduct of cultural, environm ental and social im pact assessm ents regarding developm ents proposed to take place on, or w hich are likely to im pact on, sacred sites and on lands and w aters traditionally occupied or used by indigenous and local com m unities (A nnex to C B D decision V I/7 A ). 1.2 A ssess the role of biodiversity in m ining (e.g. w ater hyacinth in w ater purification). 1.1 A ssess the ecological and socioeconom ic im pact of m ineral resource exploration, extraction and processing on the status and trends of biodiversity (natural habitats and w ildlife in particular) and its functioning. D escribe in particular the destruction and pollution of natural habitats by m ining activities. Key Actions

anctive 1: pact of mining on biodiversity nd functions, and enhance awareness pact and its implications for sustainable and poverty reduction in Cambodia.

M M

M M ctive 2: apply, as appropriate, preventive and asures

M M

M M

M M

M M

M

M

National Biodiversity Strategy an

41

4.5 Put in place program m es and resources for assessing the contribution of m ining resources to the country‟s econom y and the w ell-being of the people, and for m onitoring and evaluating the im pact of m ining activities on biodiversity and its ecosystem services, and the im pact of m easures taken to protect biodiversity from the negative im pacts of m ining activities. 4.4 Enforce the m ining law , review the code for m ining and propose, as appropriate, additions to fully take into account biodiversity issues. 4.3 D evelop G uidelines on B iodiversity-Inclusive Environm ental Im pact A ssessm ent for C am bodia building on the EIA guidelines adopted under the C B D and the R am sar C onvention, taking into account hum an health. 4.2 Facilitate and encourage the acquisition and adaptation of low carbon and clean technology for m ining activities, the 3R C oncept (reduce, recycle, re-use), land and w ater restoration and im pact assessm ent. 4.1 Strengthen the hum an, technical and technological capacities for the effective achievem ent of the objectives and im plem entation of the actions listed under this them e. C apacity-building program m es w ill target all the sectors that are relevant to m ining and the conservation of biodiversity and w ill be done essentially through com m unication, education, research and public aw areness. 3.1 M ake benefits from m ining activities a resource for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity. 2.7 R eclaim and rehabilitate degraded m ining sites 2.6 Explore biodiversity for m ining w hen preventative and corrective m easures are insufficient

M

M

M

M ctive 3: easures that will enhance the of mining resources to biodiversity  poverty reduction, sustainable and the well-being of all in Cambodia.

M

M ctive 4: e enabling environment for the on of the actions identified for riendly mining activities.

M M

M M

M G

M

M G

M M

National Biodiversity Strategy an

42

4.7 M obilize financial resources for studies, assessm ents and other activities described under this them e, using a diversified source of financial resources including the profits from m ining resources. 4.6 Strengthen coordination am ong m inistries, bearing in m ind that m ost of the actions listed above are inherently m ulti-disciplinary and m ultisectoral, and that their effectiveness requires coordination across the governm ent, also betw een governm ental and non-governm ental organizations. R ecognizing this, the governm ent form alized the cross-m inisterial coordination involved, e.g. in the EIA process w ith, (i) m anagem ent level representation of various m inistries in the Environm ent Steering C om m ittee, w hich also includes N G O s and the C ham ber of C om m erce, and (ii) form ation of environm ental units w ithin other m inistries having resource-m anagem ent functions, to coordinate w ith the M inistry of Environm ent, including the M inistry of Industry (M O I), the M inistry of M ine and Energy (M M E). A num ber of agencies of M inistries such as M A FF, the M inistry of Public W orks and Transport (M PW T), M inistry of R ural D evelopm ent (M R D ), M inistry of Tourism (M O T), and the M inistry of H ealth (M O H ) participate in m any phases of the EIA process.

M M

M M M

M M

Theme 5: Environmental Security

1.

Background

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the main issues relating to environmental security were (i) the presence of land mines that were responsible for the daily deaths or maiming of several persons; making it impossible to establish legal conservation programmes in those insecure zones, and (ii) natural disasters, more specifically floods that caused severe human suffering and deaths, serious damage to infrastructure, major disruption of social and economic activities, and loss of agricultural land and crops. In addition, although a National Committee for Disaster Management was established in 1999, awareness of disaster prevention measures and the role of biodiversity in these measures was limited.

In order to prevent and/or reduce the negative impacts of catastrophic events on biodiversity resources and improve security in areas of high biological importance, two strategic objectives were adopted in the 2002 NBSAP with the following priority actions: (i) strengthen flood prevention awareness programs and rehabilitation plans by integrating biodiversity protection measures, (ii) develop a strategy for minimizing pollution of water bodies and creating environmental security for integrated biodiversity water resources, and (iii) prevent and/or reduce damage from flood, drought, watershed degradation, erosion and sedimentation and thus protect fish and other aquatic resources.

In terms of the implementation of the adopted objectives and actions, Cambodia enacted the National Biosafety Law (2004) under MOE, and the Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of Cambodia (2007) under MOWRAM.

Moreover, the Ministry of Rural Development (MRD) adopted in 2010 the Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Strategy 2010-2025 and is implementing it in collaboration with UNICEF to address, among other points, flood responses and water supply and quality. MRD, MOWRAM and CNMC are also collaborating on an integrated management of transboundary water resources. These activities are ongoing and require additional funding to proceed effectively.

Cambodia18 made remarkable progress in reducing casualties from landmines and explosive remnants of war. The annual number of civilian casualties recorded fell from 4,320 casualties in 1996 to 243 in 2009. Due to the magnitude of the task, Cambodia was granted an extension of the period for landmine clearance from 2010 to 2019. Clearance methods are becoming safer and more efficient, with a 2% annual increase, it is expected that another 47,000 ha can be cleared by 2019.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified during the implementation of the objectives and priority actions under this theme:

(a) Development and management (i.e. conservation and sustainable use) of natural resources are impaired by natural disasters and other security problems;

(b) Negative impacts of floods on biodiversity resources;

(c) Lack of awareness of disaster prevention measures and the role of biodiversity;

(d) Limited capacities at the community and national levels to manage and reduce risk.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1: Gather relevant information and data on disasters and other environmental security problems, on disaster risks and vulnerabilities, as well as on capacities for addressing disasters and disaster risks; (b) Strategic objective 2: Identify ways and means to address environmental security through preventive, proactive and corrective measures;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for the effective implementation of measures addressing environmental security.

The strategic objectives and associated actions under the themes on protected areas (Theme 1) and threatened species (Theme 2) are also relevant here. Successful implementation of the actions identified in Table 9 will facilitate the implementation of actions under many other themes of Group 1 (conservation of the different components of biodiversity) and 2 (sustainable use of biological resources and ecosystems as well as the services they provide). In the same perspective, implementation of these actions will contribute to the implementation of various targets based on biological resources and ecosystem management such as Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 5, 6, 8, 10 to 12, 15 and 20.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

45

actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "E

nvironm

enta

Strategic Objectives

2.1 D evelop early w arning system s that are tim ely and understandable to those at risk, and guidance on how to act upon those w arnings; 1.6 C onduct risk assessm ent and risk m anagem ent of living m odified organism s and ensure adverse risk to biodiversity and hum an health is m inim ized 1.5 C om pile and standardize, as appropriate, statistical inform ation and data on regional disaster risks, im pacts and losses. 1.4 A ssess existing hum an resource capacities for disaster risk evaluation and reduction at all levels 1.3 Establish an environm ental and natural resource database and prom ote exchange and dissem ination of data for disaster risk assessm ent, m onitoring and early w arning purposes 1.2 R ecord, analyse, sum m arize, m ap and dissem inate, on a regular basis, statistical inform ation on disaster occurrence, im pacts and losses, through international, regional, national and local m echanism s 1.1 Identify, assess and m onitor disaster risks and the physical, social, econom ic and environm ental vulnerabilities of societies to disasters. Key Actions

Coordinating anparticipating ministri

agencies ective 1: nt information and data on disasters ironmental security problems, on  and vulnerabilities, as well as on  addressing disasters and disaster risks.

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E, M

O S

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E)

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E

G SSD

, M

O E, M

A FF ective 2: and means to address environmental gh preventive, proactive and corrective

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E

National Biodiversity Strategy and

46

2.2 Introduce a preventive strategy into all sectors of the society

(including, am

ong others, production, consum

ption, education, research and developm

ent, public construction w

orks, com

m unication, and w

aste m

anagem

ent) to avoid pollution occurrences and m

inim

ize pollution im

pacts of w

ater bodies.

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E 2.3 Prevent the dam

age that m

ay occur as a result of flooding, drought, w

atershed degradation, erosion and sedim

entation to protect fish resources and other aquatic biodiversity. These m

easures can include the construction or rehabilitation of bank protection w

orks, dikes, and the provision of w

ater storage facilities; the prohibition of sand m

ining on the bed and banks of w ater bodies or of the obstruction of flow

/drainage, w

ith the participation of com

m unities.

M O W R A M , M

M E, M

O M A FF, G

SSD

2.4 Integrate biodiversity protection m

easures in flood prevention aw areness program

s and rehabilitation plans (including tree planting on riverbanks and foothills, preventing deforestation, etc.)

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E, M

O S2.5 Take proactive m

easures that w

ill build com

m unity resilience and reduce vulnerability to future disaster risks. M

ore specifically, create environm

ental security for integrated biodiversity w

ater resources m

anagem

ent and developm

ent through the form

ulation and adoption of a coherent policy for the w

ater sector as a w

hole, for w

ater resource use and developm

ent planning, econom

ic instrum

ent for w

ater resource m

anagem

ent, establishm

ent of protected areas, control of floods, w

atershed, m

anagem

ent, penalties

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC and M

M E 2.6 Take corrective m

easures, bearing in m

ind that the phases of relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction follow

ing a disaster are w indow

s of opportunity for the rebuilding of livelihoods and for the planning and reconstruction of physical and socio-econom

ic structures.

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E jective 3: he enabling environment for the effective ion of measures addressing tal security

3.1 R

evise and update policies so as to integrate environm

ental security in the fram

ew ork of sustainable developm

ent and poverty reduction, w

ith a special em

phasis on disaster preparedness, prevention and m

itigation, as w

ell as vulnerability reduction

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E, M

O PM O SV

Y

National Biodiversity Strategy and

47

3.8 B uild a culture of safety, prevention and resilience, through com m unication, education and public aw areness program m es, and through the m obilization of adequate resources for disaster risk reduction 3.2 Ensure com m unity participation in disaster risk reduction through the adoption of specific policies, the attribution of roles and responsibilities, and the delegation and provision of the necessary authority and resources 3.3 D evelop or strengthen the infrastructure and scientific, technical, technological and institutional capacities needed for carrying out research, observations, analysis, m apping and, w here possible, forecasting natural and related hazards, risks from LM O s, vulnerabilities and disaster im pacts; 3.4 D evelop or strengthen institutions, m echanism s and capacities that can contribute to building resilience to hazards, in particular at the com m unity level; 3.5 A ssess existing hum an resource capacities for disaster risk reduction at all levels and develop and im plem ent capacity-building plans and program m es for m eeting on-going and future requirem ents; 3.6 Enhance cooperation w ithin the country, the region and internationally in the field of disaster risk assessm ent and reduction. 3.7 A llocate resources for the developm ent and effective im plem entation of disaster risk m anagem ent legislation, policies and program m es.

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E, M

O S

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E, M

O P

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E, M

O S

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E

N C D M , M

O E, G

SSD

M O W R A M , M

A FF, M

M LM

U PC , M

M E, M

O P

M O EY

S, N

C D M , G SSD

M O E, M

A FF

Theme

6: Sustainable Land-Use Planning

1.

Background

Recognizing the importance of planning in decisions that can have significant and sometimes irreversible impacts on land, the 2002 NBSAP focused on ensuring the integration of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and its components into land-use planning. The two strategic objectives adopted with the associated three priority actions dealt with the strengthening of institutional capacity in land-use planning, and the development of national and provincial land-use master plans, together with the development of community-based land-use planning manuals and plans.

Significant progress has been made in achieving the strategic objectives:

(a) The Ministry of Land Management Urban Plan and Construction (MLMUPC), with financial support from the Government of the Republic of Korea, carried out training about participatory land-use planning;

(b) MLMUPC also produced, in a participatory manner, the National Base Map, Map Symbol Standards, and Master Plan for the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) in Cambodia;

(c) The Inter-ministerial committee established to coordinate the preparation and implementation of development projects along the western and northern parts of the country set standards for agricultural land and residential land;

(d) Sub-decrees were signed in 2009 on the procedures for commune land-use planning, on procedures for registering land of indigenous communities, and on registration and right to use lands of indigenous communities;

(e) An approach to land classification and mapping was discussed with the support of the Land Management and Administration Project (LMAP).

Implementation of the objectives adopted in the 2002 NBSAP were also supported by laws such as the Land Law, the 2008 Law on Protected Areas, the Law on Forestry, and the Law on Fisheries; by the Sub‐ Decrees on Social Land Concession, on Community Forestry Management, on Sporadic Land Registration, on the Procedures to establish Cadastral Index Map and Land Register, on State Land Management; and by the Strategy of Land Policy Framework.

Although land-use master plans were adopted, there is still a need for financial resources for their implementation.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Development projects are still taking place at the expense of cultivable land and natural habitats, especially wetlands;

(b) A policy framework and accurate information to guide land-use allocation is still lacking, as well as effective land-use planning capacity;

(c) Roles and responsibilities of institutions need to be clarified;

(d) An official and standardized land and biome classification system is still lacking;

(e) There are still no agreed national guidelines for land-use planning, no experience in Macro Land-use planning, and no public funds invested yet in land-use planning activities;

(f) Land tenure is still a problem for many, especially rural farmers. Providing titles and security of land tenure will encourage local communities to adopt sustainable agricultural systems and increase agricultural production;

(g) Large tracts of arable land are still covered with dangerous land mines.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues:

(a) Strategic objective 1: Inventory land-use planning activities, assess their effectiveness and identify areas where land-use planning is needed to ensure the conservation of biodiversity, the sustainable use of its components, and the contribution to sustainable development and poverty eradication;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Integrate land-use planning in sustainable development and poverty reduction strategies, plans and programmes;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the land-use planning.

Strategic objectives and actions listed under this Land-Use Planning theme are important in the initial steps in implementing actions under Groups 1 (Protection of Biodiversity) and 2 (Sustainable use of Biodiversity) themes. Actions under such themes as „Resource Mobilization‟ (Theme 18), Community Participation (Theme 19), Legislation and Institutional Structure (Theme 21), Landscape and Seascape Management and Coordination (Theme 23), and CHM (Theme 24) will support the implementation of the actions listed in Table 10 below for land-use planning.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

50

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "Sustainable L nning"

Strategic Objectives

2.1 D evelop guidelines for land-use planning, building on the ecosystem approach and experiences at the national, regional and global levels, so as to optim ize the use of the resources found in the country and their social, environm ental and econom ic benefits. 1.4 R eview locations and biodiversity value of national Im portant Bird A reas (IB A ) and K ey B iodiversity A reas (K B A ); and ensure that the netw ork of IB A /K B A s are taken into account in land-use planning decisions and that any im pacts of land-use change upon IB A /K B A s are assessed through robust biodiversity-inclusive Environm ental Im pact A ssessm ents (EIA ). 1.3 A ssess existing and needed hum an, financial, technological and institutional capacities for land-use planning. 1.2 A ssess the needs for land-use planning particularly in areas w ith high or conflicting developm ent potentials, such as peri-urban areas, large irrigation schem es and hydropow er dam s. In the case of dam s, in particular, assess the im pacts of existing and planned dam s on biodiversity and ecosystem services, and identify locations and designs that w ill m inim ize those im pacts. 1.1 A ssess the effectiveness of com pleted, on-going and planned land-use-planning activities at the national, provincial and district levels, at the com m une or village or landscape levels, and at the farm or field levels, and gather inform ation about conflicts, ecosystem degradation or loss of biodiversity and its ecosystem services caused by lack of land-use planning. Key Actions

Coopmective 1:  nd-use planning activities, assess their  and identify areas where land-use eeded to ensure the conservation of  the sustainable use of its components, ribution to sustainable development and ication.

M P

M O M M

M P

M O M M G SS

M P

M O M M

M O M Pective 2:  d-use planning in sustainable  and poverty reduction strategies, plans mes.

M P

M O M M

National Biodiversity Strategy and

51

2.2 D

evelop a national land-use m

aster plan and provincial land-use plans integrating environm

ental, social and econom

ic concerns, and using a participatory approach.

M L

M O M A 2.3 D

evelop com

m unity-based land-use plans

M O

2.4 Include land-use planning in ecosystem

restoration activities.

M L

M O M A  objective 3:  en the enabling environment for the tation of land-use planning

3.1

Integrate land-use planning in all planning processes dealing w

ith biological resources and take into account present and future needs and pressures

M P

M O M M 3.2

D evelop hum

an and institutional capacity on land-use planning, including m

anuals on participatory land-use planning.

M LM

and 3.3

C om

pile inform

ation and collect data needed in land-use planning, and dissem

inate through the clearing-house m

echanism

and other relevant m

eans

M PM A 3.4

Strengthen cooperation and coordination regarding land-use planning betw

een M

LM

U PC and the departm

ents and offices in charge of natural resources, such as G

D

A N C P in M

O E or the O

ffices of Fisheries under the

D epartm

ent of A

griculture and Fisheries in M

A FF.

M P

M O M M 3.5

H ave policies in place to safeguard land against inappropriate use, especially w

here land has particular value in delivering benefits of key strategic im

portance.

M P

M O M M 3.6

M obilize the necessary financial resources to carry out activities for land-use planning.

M P

M O M M

Theme 7: Sustainable Water Resources

1. Background

Cambodia is a "water-wealthy" country, with an annual water availability of nearly 50,000m3 per person. Water resources are an essential component of the nation‟s environment and natural resource base. Cambodia possesses a vast array of water resources, with the Mekong River and the Tonle Sap lake system being the most important ones. Both constitute the basis for the country‟s fisheries, irrigated agricultural production, domestic and industrial water supply, hydro‐electric potential and navigation. A long dry season and pollution from various sources limit the amount and quality of water available for aquatic life, human consumption, agriculture and other uses. Construction and improvement of irrigation facilities and establishment of flood protection structures have always been a priority.

The creation of the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MOWRAM) in 1999 centralized jurisdiction over water resources policy and management. The ministry is responsible for management of fresh and marine water resources, including defining water resources policy and development strategies to support sustainable use, development, and national and international conservation and protection.

The main goal of the 2002 NBSAP under this theme was then to "ensure that the water environment is unpolluted and supports healthy fisheries and aquatic ecosystems". Thus five strategic objectives were adopted to ensure the application of environmental impact assessment to projects touching water resources, to ensure enough amounts of water and water flow for fisheries and fish migration, and to prevent water pollution from all sources by protecting river banks, lake shores and riparian areas. Despite the Mekong River Sustainable Development Agreement (1995), hydro dams were a hot issue for countries in the region, including Cambodia, where the EIA capacity was still weak.

A number of programmes were then identified in the 2002 NBSAP with a view of achieving the strategic objectives. They include programmes for (i) the management of water resources, (ii) public water to improve water quality for humans, livestock and aquatic biodiversity, (iii) groundwater monitoring, (iv) water pollution prevention for the industry and agriculture sectors, (iv) urban waste water treatment; and (v) ensuring the financial sustainability of hydraulic infrastructure program.

Apart from the programme on financial sustainability of hydraulic infrastructure, which has yet to be started, all the other programmes are underway and some require financial support to proceed effectively. Also MOWRAM has rehabilitated irrigation for agriculture at many sites.

It is important to note some of the relevant laws, policies and strategies adopted since 2002:

(a) The 2003 National Water Supply and Sanitation Policy contains explicit provisions regarding sanitation and hygiene improvement and advocates for a dramatic increase in rural sanitation coverage between 2015 and 2025, from the 30% targeted in the original 2015 CMDG to 100% rural sanitation coverage 10 years later. This will require investment, focused attention, and new and innovative approaches;

(b) The 2007 Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of Cambodia, which defines the rights and obligations of water users, states the fundamental principles of water resource management and identifies the institutions with the authority to implement and enforce the law and regulate the participation of users in the sustainable development of water resources. The principle of Integrated Water Resource Management requires coordinated multi-sectoral water use planning including the need for conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems. However, there is still a long way to go with regards to the implementation of the concept;

(c) The 2010 Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Strategy 2010-2025 defines the water supply, sanitation and hygiene services to be made available to people living in rural areas, as well as the institutional arrangements and financial, human and other resources necessary to sustainably provide these services. The underlying purpose is to accelerate progress toward the achievement of the Cambodian Millennium Development Goals (CMDGs) in 2015 and the Sector Vision in 2025; and

(d) The Sub‐Decrees on Water Pollution Control (1999)19, and on Solid Waste Management (1999)20.

2.

Issues

The following key issues are still impacting water resources in Cambodia:

(a) Pollution caused by agricultural, industrial and domestic activities;

(b) Negative impacts of dams, building of harbors, navigation channels, irrigation, river canalization and diversions on fish and agriculture productivity. As noted in the National Sustainable Development Strategy (2009), dam constructions can cause serious impacts on the hydrological regime of the country‟s water resources resulting in serious effects on human settlements and natural resources such as in the Tonle Sap ecosystem;

(c) Deterioration of banks and riparian zones;

(d) Lack of effective law enforcement;

(e) The government‟s limited capacity to control inappropriate settlements and use of flood management embankments;

(f) Lack of effective and popular mechanisms and means of communication and information dissemination;

(g) Limited financial resources at the national and sub-national levels, in particular for implementing the National Policy on Water Resources Management and for getting the participation of farmers in the operation and maintenance of irrigation facilities;

(h) Some water resources are shared in the region;

(i) The numerous natural disasters (floods and droughts) during the past years;

(j) Limited information, due to insufficient monitoring and observation stations, for rainfall forecasts, drought and flood warnings, as well as information on flood hydrology, river geomorphology, bank erosion locations and floodplain sediments.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues.

(a) Strategic objective 1: Maintain water resources quality and quantity suitable for human consumption, and use in agriculture, livestock and industries;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Reduce the effects of flooding and droughts on water supply and quality.

Availability of good quality water in sufficient quantity is critical for the effective management of biological resources and ecosystems/landscapes. A successful implementation of these objectives through the actions listed in Table 11 will contribute to the implementation of the objectives under Group 2 themes: to Theme 22 on health, quality of life and poverty reduction; Theme 17 on the functioning of industries; and to the NSDS vision 2030 that Cambodia should have a sustainable supply of water for key sectors such as fisheries, water supply, irrigation, hydropower, transportation, tourism, recreation, wastewater treatment and good ecosystem functions, and plan for a sustainable use of water resources based on integrated water resource management that ensures a proper quantity and quality of water.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

54

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "Sustainablesources"

Strategic Objective

1.1. D evelop and im plem ent w ater resources allocation and m anagem ent program s for fisheries, hum an consum ption, irrigation in agro-ecosystem , hydropow er, transportation, tourism , recreation, w astew ater treatm ent and good ecosystem functions 1.2. Prom ote sm all w ater investm ents in the local com m unity 1.3. D evelop and im plem ent a public w ater program to im prove w ater quality, so as to be able to satisfy present and future dem ands and ensure that w ater bodies have the capacity to sustain aquatic biodiversity and fish life, and to protect hum an and anim al health. 1.4. Ensure the financial sustainability of the hydraulic infrastructure program by including the introduction of the concept of w ater use fees, and arrangem ent for the participation of the users in the m aintenance and m anagem ent of rehabilitated and new ly constructed irrigation schem es for im proving the agriculture sector. 1.5. D evelop and im plem ent a groundw ater m onitoring program to track groundw ater quality, groundw ater pum ping for groundw ater discharge, groundw ater level, groundw ater current, and for m odelling and m apping. 1.6. D evelop and im plem ent a w ater pollution prevention program for the industry sector, and include regulations for storm w ater disposal and w astew ater m anagem ent, licensing of w astew ater abstractions and discharges, and technology developm ent transfer. 1.7. Prevent pollution of w ater for agriculture sector, m aking sure to include lakeshore and riverbanks protection and reforestation, guidelines for the application of agro-chem icals, com m unity education program s for econom ical, and low -im pact use of Key Actions

Cooparticip

anjective 1: ter resources quality and quantity human consumption, and use in livestock and industries

M O W R

M O E, G

M M E, G M O E, M

M O W R

M O W R G SSD

,

M O W R M O E, M

M O W R

M O E, M

G SSD

M O E, G

M O W R

M A FF,

M O W R

National Biodiversity Strategy an

55

agro-chem

icals. 1.8. Establish an efficient urban w

astew

ater treatm

ent program

that includes the installation of piped sew

erage in urban areas, as w

ell as the installation of household and com

m unity treatm

ent system

s.

M O E, G

M O W R

and M

M tegic objective 2: ce the effects of flooding and droughts on r supply and quality

2.1

D evelop a com

bination of prevention and adaptation m

easures to reduce the effects of flooding and droughts on the availability of good quality w

ater for hum

an, industrial and other ecological needs.

M O W R G SSD

,

Theme 8: Biodiversity and Climate Change

1. Background

Cambodia was very conscious about the increasing threats from climate change it was facing at the time of adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, with more frequent and intensified floods, droughts, saline intrusion and extreme weather events, an increasing loss of human lives, and significant damage to economic development and natural resources. Cambodia was highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change due to its high dependency on climate-sensitive sectors, such as agriculture, water resources, forestry, fisheries and tourism, all of which form the foundation of its economic growth and support the livelihoods of a great majority of its population.

The main issues at that time in relation to biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services were (i) the potential impacts of sea level rise, temperature increase and change in precipitation on biodiversity and (ii) the potential impacts of climate change mitigation or adaptation measures on biodiversity. The 2002 NBSAP thus contained strategic objectives and priority actions for the integration of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use into the National Climate Change Action Plan, and for assessing and addressing climate change impacts on biodiversity.

Since then, the Climate Change Department (CCD) of the Ministry of Environment,, in collaboration with other partners and with the support of some donors, have been implementing many activities contributing to biodiversity management. The National Climate Change Committee (NCCC) was established in 2006 with the mandate to coordinate and monitor the implementation of the Government‟s policies, strategies, regulations, plans and programmes in response to climate change issues. A Climate Change Technical Team (CCTT) was established as an inter-ministerial body to provide technical support to the NCCC in fulfilling its mandate. The Climate Change Department (CCD) within MOE serves as the Secretariat for the NCCC and coordinates the activities of the CCTT. Its tasks have been to build institutional capacity, formulate the climate change strategy plan for the next 10 years and promote its implementation, and to mainstream climate change into planning and budgeting process, while working toward the building of community resilience and sustainable livelihood in the face of climate change.

The National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) on Climate Change was also developed and adopted in 2006, and the second national communication was developed in 2007. The following points were noted in the NAPA for Cambodia (i) key climate-related hazards include: flooding (flash), salt water intrusion, coastal zone inundation, drought and low flows, windstorms, and storm surge; (ii) the main human vulnerabilities and livelihood impacts include reduced agricultural production, water shortage and/or groundwater depletion, and increased disease and/or other health problems; (iii) examples of priority adaptation projects include vegetation planting for flood and windstorm protection, community mangrove restoration and sustainable use of natural resources, and production of biopesticides.

As stated in the National Strategic Development Plan Update 2009-2013, the integration of climate change into national and sub-national level planning, and the development of climate change strategies, action plans and financing frameworks are among the priority actions undertaken. The Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023 (CCCSP) was adopted in 2013. The strategic objectives of the CCCSP were formulated in part based on the strategic objectives of the relevant sectors and line ministries, including in particular MOE and MAFF that are dealing with most of the components of biodiversity.

The following strategic objectives of the CCCSP are directly relevant to biodiversity conservation and sustainable use: (i) Strategic Objective 1: Promote climate resilience through improving food, water and energy security; (ii) Strategic Objective 2: Reduce sectoral, regional, and gender vulnerabilities and health risks related to climate change impacts; and (iii) Strategic Objective 3: Ensure climate resilience of critical ecosystems (such as Tonle Sap Lake, Mekong River, coastal ecosystems, and the highlands among others), of biodiversity, protected areas and cultural heritage sites.

2.

Issues

Despite the progress made since adopting the 2002 NBSAP, the following key issues have been identified:

(a) Potential impacts of sea level rise, temperature increase and change in precipitation on biodiversity composition, distribution, survival, and the like;

(b) Potential impacts of climate change mitigation or adaptation measures on biodiversity;

(c) Limited water resources, as well as limited financial resources and access to agricultural techniques;

(d) Cambodia is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change, particularly to floods, droughts and tropical storms. Most Cambodians depend on agriculture, but they lack the infrastructure and information necessary to cope with extreme events. Observations of climate change over the past 30 to 50 years in the lower Mekong basin show an increase in temperature and in rainfall during the wet season, intensified flooding (particularly in the Mekong Delta and Cambodia floodplain) and drought events, sea level rise and salinity intrusion in the Mekong delta.

In terms of climate change, Cambodia indicates some weaknesses that are listed in the 2013 Cambodia Climate Change Strategy:

(a) Weak knowledge and science-based decision making;

(b) Lack of a clear procedure for the integration of climate change into the national development plans;

(c) Limited capacity of the national institutions responsible for climate change and limited participation of stakeholders;

(d) Out-dated information to address climate impacts;

(e) Limited human resources;

(f) Climate change planning is not a common practice;

(g) Limited knowledge, research and technology;

(h) Limited financial resources;

(i) Low adaptive capacity among citizens.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1: Assess the actual and projected impact of climate change and climate change mitigation or adaptation measures on genetic resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services, and on sectors depending primarily on biodiversity, in particular agriculture, fisheries and livestock;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Assess and document the role of biodiversity in climate change mitigation and adaptation measures, and strengthen biodiversity conservation measures that have a positive impact on climate change mitigation and adaptation;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Minimize anthropogenic pressures such as pollution, exploitation and sedimentation on ecosystems that are vulnerable to climate change, so as to maintain their integrity, functioning and resilience;

(d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the actions that promote climate change mitigation and adaptation through the conservation of biodiversity, the sustainable use and, where needed, the restoration of its components.

Implementing the actions identified under these strategic objectives will contribute to achieving the objectives under all the themes relating to biological resources and ecosystem services conservation and sustainable use (such as under the themes in Groups 1 and 3). The following actions listed in Table 12 below will also contribute directly to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 11 (on enhancing ecosystem resilience and the contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks through conservation and restoration of degraded ecosystems and thus on contribution to climate change mitigation and adaptation) and 15 (for the reduction of anthropogenic pressures vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate change). These actions are also relevant to many other targets, such as those pursuing effective management of forests, agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries and animal production.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

58

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "B

iodiversityange" Strategic Objectives

Key Actions ctive 1: rent and projected impact of climate change and e mitigation or adaptation measures on genetic cies, ecosystems and related ecosystem services, s depending primarily on biodiversity, in iculture, fisheries and livestock

1.1

A ssess the current and projected im

pact of sea level rise, increased tem

perature, drought and natural disasters on biological resources and related ecosystem

s resulting directly or indirectly from

clim ate change and requiring priority conservation in C

am bodia. The focus w

ill be prim

arily on identifying areas that are naturally resilient to clim

ate change and on the im

pacts on agricultural and fishery productivity and sustainability, as w

ell as on anim

al and hum

an health 1.2

R eview

the im

pact of clim

ate change m

itigation or adaptation m

easures taken, particularly the establishm

ent of PA

s and conservation areas, on genetic resources, species, ecosystem

s and related ecosystem

services, and on agriculture, fisheries and livestock 1.3

Increase the resilience of vulnerable local com

m unities to the im

pacts of clim

ate change on biodiversity. 1.4 A ssess the vulnerability of the different com

ponents of biodiversity (genetic resources, species and ecosystem

s) to clim

ate change and, on that basis, prioritizeadaptation m

easures for key regions of C

am bodia, such as coastal zones, highlands, rural and urban areas threatened by clim

ate change, as w

ell protected area m

anagem

ent effectiveness 1.5 Identify and assess factors that exacerbate the effects of clim

ate change (e.g. coastal area erosion, silting of lakes, establishm

ent of dam

s etc.)  ctive 2: cument the role of biodiversity in climate change  adaptation measures, and strengthen onservation measures that have a positive impact

2.1 D

ocum ent the role of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity (particularly in protected areas or conservation areas), recovery and reintroduction of species, and restoration of degraded ecosystem

s for clim

ate change m

itigation and adaptation, and for com

bating desertification and disaster risk reduction

National Biodiversity Strategy and

59

nge mitigation and adaptation

2.2 A

ssess the effectiveness of the protected area system

in place; its effectiveness in the conservation of species, genetic resources and ecosystem

s against current and predicted clim

ate im

pacts. 2.3 Identify and address the gaps in the protected area system

, bearing in m

ind the possible range shifts in plant and anim

al species populations in the face of clim

ate change. 2.4 Ensure clim

ate resilience of critical ecosystem

s (such as Tonle Sap Lake, cultural heritage sites, M

ekong R

iver, low

land deciduous dipterocarp forests, coastal ecosystem

s, and highlands.) through the strengthening of the national protected area system

(see Them

e 1 above) consisting of protected areas and conservation areas that are ecologically representative, effectively m

anaged, w

ell connected and w

ell integrated in w

ider landscapes and seascapes. 2.5 Enhance the contribution of ecosystem

s to carbon sequestration through R

ED

D +, the establishm

ent and/or restoration of protected forests, com

m unity forests and w ildlife corridors. 2.6 A

dopt farm

ing system

s (e.g. m

ultiple cropping system

s, use of biom

ass m

ulching, low

greenhouse gas em

ission agriculture and anim

al production) that are m

ore resilient to clim

ate change and that em

it less greenhouse gases. ctive 3: ropogenic pressures (such as pollution, nd sedimentation) on ecosystems that are climate change, so as to maintain their integrity, d resilience

3.1 M

inim

ize pollution in developm

ent projects (see in particular them

es 4 on m

ining, 7 on w

ater resources and 11 on m

arine and coastal resources)  3.2 Prom

ote recycling and re-use of w

astes, and of system

s w

ith reduced w

astes (see in particular them

es 5 on environm

ental security, 7 w

ater resources and 17 on industry, technology and services.)  3.3 C

arry out biodiversity-inclusive environm

ental im

pact assessm

ent for public w orks and developm

ent projects.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

60

3.4 Ensure that protected areas and conservation areas are effectively m

anaged through robust patrolling and zonation plans to lim

it clim

ate induced pressures through increased exploitation  tive 4: enabling environment for the implementation of the omote climate change mitigation and adaptation nservation of biodiversity, the sustainable use and,  the restoration of its components

4.1 Enhance participation in climate change assessments and response activities, as well as cooperation and coordination frameworks for addressing climate change within the commitments under the multilateral environmental agreements, essentially through:

a. the mainstreaming of climate change in the relevant sectors; b.

participatory land-use planning; c.

South-South cooperation, e.g. under the ASEAN framework and trans- boundary initiatives within the M

ekong River Basin framework, as well as North-South collaboration. 4.2

M obilize financial resources and support for im

plem entation of actions under this them

e, involving a num

ber of w

ell-coordinated m

echanism

s, w ith a m

ix of traditional and innovative instrum

ents related to clim

ate finance, such as the A daptation Fund, the G

reen C

lim ate Fund, paym

ent for ecosystem

services including w

ithin R

ED D +, financial and fiscal incentives, carbon m

arket m echanism

s, and public-private partnerships. 4.3

D evelop and im

plem ent w ell-targeted education, training, com

m unication and aw areness-raising program

m es. 4.4

Strengthen the clearing-house m

echanism

and other m

eans (such as radio, television, new

spapers, m

obile and w

eb technologies and targeted outreach m

aterials) for im

proved access to relevant inform

ation, know

ledge m

anagem

ent, and technical and technological cooperation on clim

ate change issues. 4.5 Strengthen the capacity for collection, analysis, m

odelling and interpretation of clim

ate data; for inform

ation m

anagem

ent and dissem

ination to various end-users, including seasonal forecasting for adaptation and com

m unity early-w arning facilities for disaster risk m

anagem

ent; and for technology acquisition and adaptation to the country situation.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

61

4.6

Strengthen institutions and coordination fram

ew orks for national clim

ate change responses and application of relevant policies, related legal fram

ew orks and action plans, and application of enforcing m

echanism

s. 4.7

Prom

ote and encourage com

m unity-and ecosystem

-based natural resources m anagem

ent approaches as cost-effective w

ays of addressing clim

ate change.

GROUP 2: SUSTAINABLE USE OF BIODIVERSITY (Themes 9-16) Theme 9: Sustainable Forest Resources Management

1. Background

It was recognized in the 2009 NSDS that forests provide many significant resources, functions and services, including providing many primary and secondary economic products, recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, water and soil conservation, a filter for pollutants, in addition to absorbing CO2 and producing oxygen. Forest biodiversity provides not only timber but a wide range of non-timber forest resources including bushmeat, and food, medicinal and cosmetic plants, as well as wildlife and a diversity of landscapes of interest for example to tourism. Forests contain sources of water and perform services such as air purification, maintenance of soil fertility and biota, and soil and water conservation, all of which are essential to human well-being.

In addition to supporting biodiversity, forests also support employment and traditional uses by the people. There is a general concern over the human impact on forest health and the natural processes of forest growth and regeneration. The human threat to forest resources has been increasing in the form of illegal logging activities and inappropriate forest sub‐product collection, including land clearing for agriculture and ownership. The volume of forest logging increased dramatically in the early 1990s given that it was one of the major sources of income for rural people, and of revenue for different factions.

At the time of adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, deforestation was estimated to occur at a rate seven times higher than the sustainable level due to the extraction of firewood and charcoal production. It was acknowledged, at the policy level, that the long-term benefits from the country's forest resources could be optimized through proper conservation and management of forest ecosystems. In addition to providing environmental benefits, the sound management of forests was also considered to be a source of long-term income for the government, the people living in or near forested areas, and the private sector involved in forest management. Opportunities to reverse deforestation included the development of sustainable forest management plans and better monitoring of forest concessions, improved capacity for law enforcement, and the establishment of forest plantations with both fast growing exotic as well as domestic hardwood species.

At the time, the primary challenges included over-harvesting of trees for timber, firewood and charcoal production; ineffective law enforcement; impacts of public works such as road building; watershed degradation; limited extent of forest demarcation; incomplete understanding of the status, trends and values associated with forest resources and forest ecosystem services, and limited awareness and application of best management practices.

The 2002 NBSAP addressed these challenges to ensure the sustainable protection, use and management of forests and woodlands, and to improve the efficiency and sustainability of extraction, transformation and use of timber and non-timber forest products. The specific objectives and actions were articulated around the development of a comprehensive national plan for the sustainable management of the country‟s forest estate. The plan incorporated the following objectives:

(a) Reforestation using native species, while restricting the introduction of exotic species, and while rehabilitating the degraded forest areas;

(b) Strengthening of law enforcement to prevent illegal logging, including extension of the Forest Crime Monitoring Unit and application of environmental impact assessments to forest harvesting activities;

(c) Monitoring and evaluation of forest concession allocation and management;

(d) Involvement of local communities in forest protection, management and improvement;

(e) Promotion of environmentally friendly forestry practices;

(f) Monitoring of the status and trends of forest cover and resources;

(g) Delineation of the permanent forest estate for conservation, community use and industrial protection, and forest inventories and damage assessment.

There has been considerable progress since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, but much remains to be accomplished to achieve its objectives:

(a) Cambodia enacted the Forestry Law in 2002, which defines the framework for management, harvesting, use, development and conservation of forests throughout the country. The objective of the Forestry Law is to ensure the sustainable management of forests for their social, economic and environmental benefits, including the conservation of biological diversity and cultural heritage. Under the Forestry Law, the state ensures customary user rights of forest products and by-products for local communities. It also confirms that the management of forests is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), with the exception of the management of flooded forests, which is covered under a different law, and delegates the authority to manage Protected Areas to the Ministry of Environment. Article 4 of the Forestry Law states that prior to major forest ecosystem related activities that might significantly impact the environment and social conditions, an environmental and social impact assessment must be conducted.

(b) The CMDG target of maintaining forest cover at 60% in 2015, bringing it down from 61.15% in 2002 was not met (forest cover was about 57.59% in 2009). The causes of deforestation and forest degradation have not yet been reduced sufficiently. These causes include the high levels of poverty resulting from the country‟s long civil war and social dislocations, which led to increases in illegal forest activities and weak law enforcement; rapid population growth and the subsequent overharvesting of forest resources, and the clearing of forests to support the expansion of subsistence agriculture; and the insufficient number of Forestry Administration (FA) staff, as well as their often-limited technical capacities, insufficient amount of available equipment, and lack of cross-sectoral collaboration.

(c) The Rectangular Strategy (RS)-Phase II (2008-2013), which is a national socio-economic development policy agenda, focused on four components, including (i) agricultural development; (ii) infrastructure rehabilitation development; (iii) private sector development and employment creation; and (iv) capacity building and human resource development. The priorities for forestry reform included law enforcement, effective management of protected areas, climate change actions and the promotion of community forestry programs.

(d) It should be emphasized that the decline of forest resources and forestland has had impacts on the socio-economic lives of rural communities; the deteriorated ecological functions affect local agriculture and animal husbandry. As a result, the rural population has had to travel to more distant forest areas to satisfy their requirements for forest products, resulting in conflicts with other communities or law enforcement officers. The lack of clear demarcations, classifications and registration distorts the interpretation of land tenure and user rights, both of which are essential elements in management planning and conflict prevention and resolution. Local communities are gradually turning to their adjacent degraded forests to initiate protection measures in order to restore forests and livelihoods.

(e) As stated in the report on the Cambodia‟s MDG, "according to national census figures from 1998 to 2008, domestic fuelwood dependency decreased only from 90.4% of households to 83.6%, a figure still much higher than the current linear path target of 64.7%. If charcoal is included in fuelwood consumption, the figure rises to 91.1% (charcoal was not included in the baseline). Using a more precise measurement of fuelwood consumption, the Ministry of Mines, Industry and Energy (MIME) estimated the 2008 figure at 73% of households and projected this would be 54% in 2013." In the short term, the Government is promoting affordable and efficient commercial cooking stoves as a strategy to reduce fuelwood consumption. One million efficient cooking stoves have been produced since 2003, saving an estimated 5,000ha of forest over that same period. In the long term, the Government is pursuing a strategy for rural electrification supplemented by various small-scale renewable energy programs. These actions to reduce dependence on fuelwood should be scaled up together with improvements in farming techniques, and engagement in an active programme of forest rehabilitation and reforestation, including commercial plantations.

(f) Building on the 2002 Forestry Law the RGC has embedded forestry sector reforms into the Cambodian National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2009-2013, as well as into the country‟s Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in Cambodia - Phase II of the fourth legislature policy priorities. In 2010, the RGC approved a National Forest Programme (NFP) aligned with those strategies, with the following priority programme areas to be addressed from 2011 to 2029: (i) forest demarcation taking into account both the Forestry Law (2002) and the Land Law (2001) and the classification and registration of forest as "Production Forests", "Protection Forests" or "Conversion Forests"; (ii) conservation and development of forest resources and biodiversity; (iii) forest law enforcement and governance; (iv) community forestry programme; (v) capacity and research development; and (vi) sustainable forest financing. Biodiversity elements of the 2010 NPF strategy have been integrated into this updated NBSAP.

(g) The Cambodia REDD+ National Roadmap outlines the national plan for „REDD+ Readiness‟ activities; and the National Policy and Strategic Plan for Green Growth recognizes the role of REDD+ in sustainable forest management and conservation in Cambodia.

(h) Other supportive legislations and sub-decrees include the 1993 Royal Decree on the Creation and Designation of Protected Areas, the 1996 Law on Environmental Protection and National Resources Management, the 2003 Sub-decree on Community Forestry Management, the 2008 Law on Protected Areas, and other forest-related sub-decrees.

(i) Cambodia‟s post 2002 achievements in its commitment to manage forests sustainably include the following:

x Illegal logging and other human pressures that deplete forest areas have declined or been eradicated in many areas as people are now complying more often with forest-related regulations and policies;

x The adoption of Codes of Practice for sustainable forest management;

x The termination of forest concession agreements with 15 companies with a cumulative forest area greater than 3 million ha, some of which have been converted to protected forests, and the decision to require remaining forest concession companies to develop approved Sustainable Forest Management Plans and Environmental and Social Impact Assessments and sign new investment agreements;

x The designation of 20 additional Protected Forest and Biodiversity Conservation areas administered by the Forestry Administration of MAFF covering 1.63 million hectares21 and 8 fish conservation areas administered by the Fisheries Administration;

x The termination of agreements of commercial fishing lots and subsequent reservation for local community use. Community forest management is where the local community takes responsibility for sustainable forest management with the support from the Forest Administration; and the supply and income from forest products can help to reduce poverty;

x The decision that the remaining forest resources of the country shall be considered as Permanent Forest Estate to be managed by promoting conservation and sustainable forest management initiatives that directly contribute to the rehabilitation and conservation of a maximum stock of forested land and forest resources; and

x Development of a Forest Gene Conservation Strategy under the DANIDA supported Cambodia Tree Seed Project, in which 34 indigenous tree species have priority status for conservation; 7 distinct gene-ecological zones have been established on the basis of bio-climate, vegetation, physiography and soil; a seed source registration system and the initiation of community participation in forest gene conservation and tree seed source management has been developed.

2.

Issues

Despite the progress that has been accomplished since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the following issues have been identified, recognizing that forest biodiversity is a broad term that includes the variety and variability of animals, plants and micro-organisms found in forests at the genetic, species and ecosystem levels which are necessary to sustain forest functions, structures and processes:

(a) Incomplete understanding of the status and trends associated with forest resources;

(b) Continued deforestation, forest ecosystem/habitat fragmentation, conversion to agricultural land and degradation associated with: infrastructure development (road building, urbanization, mining), watershed degradation, forest fires, and illegal logging;

(c) Climate change;

(d) Introduction and spread of invasive alien plant and animal species;

(e) Over-harvesting of trees for timber, fuelwood and charcoal production; and non-timber forest products (plants and animals, including bushmeat);

(f) Overhunting or illegal trade of wildlife;

(g) Overgrazing;

(h) Limited community-managed forest areas and use of traditional knowledge;

(i) Water pollution;

(j) Inadequate law enforcement and conflicts over rights of access and use that enable illegal logging and encroachment/land grabbing;

(k) Incomplete forest demarcation;

(l) Limited effectiveness of protected forests;

(m) Limited individual technical and institutional capacities and knowledge;

(n) Sectoral land-use planning at the expense of effective collaborations between ministries and institutions; and

(o) Limited financial resources, including limited forestry revenues not reinvested into the sector.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address these identified issues:

(a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about forest genetic resources, species, ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable development and poverty eradication in Cambodia;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that are impacting Cambodia‟s forest resources and forest functions, and apply as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on forest biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits from forest resources and, in general, forest ecosystems, to all Cambodians;

(d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the actions identified under the strategic objectives relating to forests.

The implementation of the strategic objectives on forest resources and forest landscapes will be supported by the implementation of several of the actions that are listed under all the other themes. The actions identified in Table 13 will contribute directly to the achievement of the national targets for biodiversity 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9 to 12, 15 to 20, and, vice versa, implementation of actions under each of these targets will support the achievement of the targets relating to forests. Each of these targets will support the achievement of the NSDS vision that by 2030 Cambodia will possess forests that cover a large part of the country and are well protected, that are rich in biodiversity and providing valuable environmental services, and that are managed in a sustainable manner in order to contribute effectively to the reduction of the impacts of climate change and to allow sustainable timber production and a sustainable supply of energy resources and non‐timber forest products for the people of Cambodia, in particular its rural communities.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

66

ey actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "Sustainable esources M

anagem

ent"

Strategic Objectives

1.1 Im prove know ledge and understanding of the status and trends of forest types and their coverage and functions in C am bodia, as w ell as the associated traditional know ledge of those forests, by conducting local, regional and national assessm ents and organizing inform ation in databases and through the national clearing-house m echanism on: (a) The status and trend of different com ponents of forest biodiversity (including plants, anim als and m icroorganism s) w ith an em phasis on those com ponents that are the m ost critical to the functioning of forest ecosystem s or sea- and landscapes, that are im portant to sustainable developm ent and poverty eradication, and that require priority conservation; (b) The roles and values of biodiversity com ponents, including their contributions to the m itigation of clim ate change and the national econom y and the socioeconom ic and environm ental im pacts of forest cover and biodiversity loss, as w ell as forest ecosystem degradation; (c) M ore specifically, the role and value of forests in socioecological production landscapes (SEPLs); (d) The extraction of tim ber, fuelw ood and non-tim ber forest products; (e) The pressures im pacting forest landscapes and resources, including m angroves; (f) T raditional know ledge and custom ary protocols associated w ith the country‟sforests; and (g) Technology available for the conservation and sustainable use of forest resources and landscapes. 1.2 Identify ecologically or biologically significant forest areas and areas that are vulnerable or particularly sensitive to clim ate change and other anthropogenic pressures. 1.3 Enhance aw areness of the status, trends, values and threats to forests resources and landscapes. Key Actions

anjective 1: ventory, monitor and enhance awareness about tic resources, species, ecosystems and related ervices that are important for sustainable t and poverty eradication in Cambodia.

M G

M G

M G

National Biodiversity Strategy an

67

jective 2: d describe the direct and indirect factors and at are im

pacting C

am

bodia's forest resources unctions, and apply, as appropriate, preventive ive measures.

2.1

Identify direct and indirect factors negatively affecting all types of forests in C

am bodia, and identify priority com

ponents of forest landscapes. A

ssess their im pacts and establish a national m

onitoring program

.

M G 2.2

U sing m

acro land-use planning that allow

s for holistic planning across sectors, jurisdictions and local governm

ent borders (O

bjective 3 of the N

ational Forest

Program

m e 2010 - 2029(N

FP)), and taking into account m

odern sustainable m anagem

ent m

odels adaptive to changing contexts (N

FP objective 8), as w

ell as the 2002 Forest Law

, the 2001 Land Law

and related sub-decrees,  a.

D em arcate forest boundaries, classify and register forest types in the country;

b.

D evelop and im

plem

ent a com

prehensive national plan for the m

anagem

ent of the forest estate, including the revision and updating of the present legislation regarding all aspects of forest resources protection and conservation and m

oving tow

ards forest certification according to international norm

s; protection of resource tenure rights and practices of local com

m unities and indigenous ethnic m

inorities; expansion of com

m unity-based forestry and other participatory m

anagem

ent processes; and the developm

ent of plantation forestry to increase the forest area under sustainable m

anagem

ent;  c.

D evelop plans for com

m unity-based forest m

anagem

ent, including guidelines for com

m unity forestry initiatives and other types of com

m unity forestry (e.g. C

om

m unity-B

ased Production Forestry, C

om

m unity

C onservation Forestry, C

om

m unity Protected A

reas) to ensure the protection and conservation of forest resources (N

FP objective 7) and forest landscapes; d.

R estore and rehabilitate prioritized forest landscapes.

M G 2.3

A dopt m

easures and policies, including the application of environm

ental im

pact assessm

ent, forest certification (N

FP sub-program

m e) and custom

ary sustainable use practices, as w

ell as forest law

enforcem

ent, to significantly reduce deforestation and forest degradation.

M G 2.4

Provide appropriate incentives to encourage the private sector to establish com

m ercial forest plantations on degraded forestland based on agreed technical standards.

M G

National Biodiversity Strategy an

68

2.5

Prevent the introduction and/or spread of invasive alien species that threaten forest ecosystem

s and m

itigate their negative im

pacts by arresting their spread and attem

pting to eradicate them

if they have been previously introduced. M

ore specifically, develop policies and guidelines prom

oting the use of native species in cultivation and restricting the introduction of introduced species.

M G

2.6

A dapt to clim

ate change and m

itigate its effects on forest-based livelihoods (N

FP O

bjective 2) through:  a.

Tree planting and forest plantations (N

FP sub-program

m e); b.

The reduction of deforestation and forest degradation, in line w

ith the R

ED

D + N

ational Strategy and program

m es; c.

The protection of selected forest areas; and  d.

The restoration of forest ecosystem

s and recovery of forest com

ponents.

M G

2.7

Prom

ote the sustainable use of forest resources including non-tim

ber forest products (such as bushm

eat) and the various services derived from

forest biodiversity

M G

2.8

Establish and support sm

all- and m

edium

scale forest-based enterprises or cooperatives operating in each forestry cantonm

ent for the processing of w

ood for export, as w

ell as the processing of non-tim

ber forest products

M G

2.9

R educe losses associated w

ith unsustainable harvesting of tim

ber and non-tim

ber forest resources.

M G 2.10 Support activities relating to the Satoyam

a Initiative for the rehabilitation and strengthening of socioecological production landscapes (SEPL)

M G

2.11 Im

plem

ent the N

agoya Protocol in relation to forest resources.

M G ic objective 3: in or strengthen measures that have a positive  on forest biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits rest resources and, in general, forest ecosystems, to

3.1

M axim

ize sustainable forest contributions to poverty reduction, enhanced livelihoods and equitable econom

ic grow

th (N

FP O

bjective 1) by: a.

Ensuring that m

anagem

ent of protected forests and protection forests is effective.

b.

Support the benefits derived from

socioecological production landscapes

M G

National Biodiversity Strategy an

69

odia

w ithin the Satoyam

a Initiative. c.

D evelop and im

plem

ent program

m es and plans supporting new

processing technologies for high-value forest products and by-products (N

FP subprogram

m e) that w

ill expand m

arket opportunities and increase forest contribution to poverty reduction, enhanced livelihoods, and econom

ic developm

ent, w

hile safeguarding environm

ental services. d.

Im prove the sharing/distribution of incom

es collected from

the forestry sector. jective 4: the enabling environment for the tion of the actions identified under the jectives relating to forests

4.1

A ssess the needs of hum

an and research capacities and develop a program

m e to address those needs (N

FP sub-program

m e 5.1 and 5.3).

M G 4.2

R aise the capacity of institutions and the quality of education dealing w

ith forests (N

FP objective 6).

M G 4.3

Extend and further support com

m unity forestry.

M 4.4

Train local com

m unities, the private sector and local forest adm

inistrations in sustainable forest m

anagem

ent.

M

G 4.5

Ensure m

axim

um

participation from

the private sector and local com

m unities in forest conservation and m

anagem

ent for sustainable developm

ent.

M

M

4.6

Enhance the m

onitoring, inspection and evaluation capacities and capacities for reporting on sustainable forest m

anagem

ent.

M G 4.7

Im prove forest law

enforcem

ent and governance (FLEG

) at all levels (N

FP objective 4) in particular through:  a.

The expansion of the Forest C

rim

e M

onitoring U

nit (FC

M U ) project;  b.

Enforcem

ent of the im

plem

entation of the Forestry Law

; c.

The developm

ent of conflict m

anagem

ent system

(N

FP objective 5); d.

The strengthening of enforcem

ent in protected areas and protected forests and the im

provem

ent of policies to support these efforts.

M G 4.8

D evelop diversified sustainable financing system

s for the forestry sector, including the use of the N

ational Forestry D

evelopm

ent Fund established in the 2002 Forestry Law

(N

FP objective 9).

M G

Theme 10: Sustainable Freshwater Fisheries and Aquaculture

1. Background

Cambodia is one of the four largest fish producers in South-East Asia, specializing in fresh water fish from rivers, ponds and lakes. The Mekong River and Tonle Sap Lake are the main freshwater areas. Together with rice, fish constitutes the foundation of food security in Cambodia. In 2009, the fish catch from the Tonle Sap Lake represented about 60% of the total commercial fish catch of the country. The fishery sector contributes to around 5 to 10% of the GDP, while fish makes up 40% of the rural population‟s animal protein intake. Fisheries play a crucial role in supplying food for the Cambodian people, as well as in supporting the national economy.

As stated in the 2010 CMDG report, fisheries in Cambodia underwent reforms in 2000. Seventy-eight fishing lots were completely released and 81 fishing lots were partly released, resulting in a total area of 541,206 ha out of total 953,740 ha (56.74%) released for family-scale fishing by September 2010. The number of community fisheries (CFi) increased from 246 in 2002 to 469 in 2010, covering an area of 683,734 ha (of which 236, covering an area of 553,438 ha, are registered), with plans to reach 470 registered in 2015. In addition, 390 Community Fish Refuges (CFR) (1,170 ha) and 335 fish sanctuaries (46,618 ha) have been established. In 2012, Cambodia underwent another round of fishery reforms, with the closure of all fishing lots (80 fishing lots) covering a total area of 412,534 ha by keeping 50 new fisheries as conservation areas (97,503 ha) and community fisheries (315,031 ha). Currently, there are 516 community fisheries (998,765 ha) and 58 freshwater fisheries conservation areas (120,003 ha), which is equal to 10.23% of the total freshwater fishing areas. For coastal areas, Fisheries Administration has been establishing the first Marine Fisheries Management area located in Koh Rong, Preah Sihanouk province with the total area of 44,000 ha.

In recent years, the volume of fish caught has dropped due to the increasing number of fishers. Reports indicate that some fish species, particularly among the larger size species, are becoming endangered. Additional threats to fisheries were compiled in the Strategic Planning Framework 2010-2019 for Fisheries - Cambodia. They include: (i) loss of breeding habitat and declining wild stocks because of: climate change leading to changes in water levels, flow rates and flooding patterns, (ii) environmental degradation from pollution and increased mining sediment, (iii) damming, land conversion and deforestation, (iv) increased pressure on the resource due to economic and population growth factors, (v) increased international trade competition and more stringent import regulations, (vi) uncontrolled, illegal and destructive fishing, leading to conflict, (vii) disease, especially in aquaculture, and (viii) loss of land for fisheries due to weaknesses in land management.

Aquaculture systems were encouraged to correct this situation and ensure a sustainable fish supply. The importance of aquaculture development was underscored in the Second Five-Year Fisheries Sector Development Plan 2001-2005, and the development of freshwater and marine aquaculture was listed among the goals of the Agricultural Development Plan 2000-200522. The Fisheries Department with the assistance of development agencies has actively promoted aquaculture in the uplands. This aquaculture is predominantly based on introduced species of fish and as such may be a serious threat to native fish-stocks. Adding to the threat, there are no guidelines for the importation of exotic species for culture that take into account environmental impact studies and environmental standards for fish-farms. The 2006 Law on Fisheries contains a chapter on aquaculture and makes general provisions on inland aquaculture and mariculture authorizations, water quality and discharge of waste matter, and on import, export and transport of live or fresh fish and processed fish products.

Fisheries management in Cambodia is divided between central and local governments. At the central level, the Department of Fisheries of the MAFF is responsible for developing research and drafting laws and policies on fisheries (and aquaculture) and is vested with inspecting powers. At the local level, fisheries are managed by the Provincial-Urban Fishery Authorities, which ensure compliance with the law in the area under their jurisdiction.

Fisheries in Cambodia are organized into industrial (large-scale), artisanal (medium- scale) and family fisheries (small-scale). They use different fishing times and fishing gears. Fishing gears and methods can be divided in two broad categories: limited access fisheries mainly for industrial fisheries and open access fisheries. The number of open access fisheries has grown significantly in recent years and can be categorized into small-scale or family fisheries, licensed fisheries and illegal fisheries. Small-scale or family fisheries are permitted to use diverse fishing gears; restrictions apply only on the size of the gears.

Unlike medium- and large-scale fishing which is restricted to the open season only, small-scale or family fishing is not restricted to a set season but is permitted all year round. Illegal fisheries are those fishing practices referred to as illegal in the 2006 Law on Fisheries, such as brush parks and explosives.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the main issues with freshwater fisheries and aquaculture had to do with unsustainable and illegal fishing; insufficient protection of selected fish areas and related capacity building activities to correct the limited awareness and to increase expertise, including within local communities and for the demarcation of fishing areas; and weak law enforcement.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the MAFF Department of Fisheries Conservation of the Fisheries Administration has demarcated many fisheries conservation areas, reviewed and reduced the fishing lot system to enhance community-based fisheries management. The Government has shown strong political will and the Prime Minister responded to this with the closure of 80 fishing lots in 201223. All fishing lots throughout Cambodia have now been cancelled. A range of projects were undertaken to support sustainable fisheries, including but not limited to the Tonle Sap Environmental Management Project/Sustainable Livelihoods Project and ECOSORN,, along with environmental education and training, land-use planning, resource zonation, community development, small scale industrial development, fish and agriculture products processing, and involvement of local authorities. As part of the fishery monitoring and protection activities, fish conservation areas have been established including 8 fish sanctuaries under the authority of the MAFF Fisheries Administration 24.

The 2006 Law on Fisheries was promulgated "to ensure fisheries and fishery resource management, enhance aquaculture development, the management of production and processing, and to promote the livelihood of people in local communities for the social-economic and environmental benefits, including the sustainability of the conservation of biodiversity and natural culture heritages in the Kingdom". Since then, the fisheries sector has undergone major reforms within the framework of the ten-year Strategic Plan 2009-2018 and the first three-year-rolling on Fishery Sector Development Action Plan, 2009-2011. These Plans have been developed based on the Cambodian Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishery. The Fisheries Administration also tightened its efforts in preventing and suppressing flooded forest land-grabbing25. Additional supportive legislations include, among others, the 2005 Royal Decree on the Establishment of Community Fisheries26 and the 2005 Sub Decree of Community Fisheries Management27.

However, as reported in the 2009 NSDS, the fish stock remained under threat by direct and indirect factors, including over‐fishing, destructive fishing practices, destruction of fish habitats, increased sedimentation, water pollution and impacts by up‐stream dam development. The following obstacles to fisheries were highlighted: (i) insufficient information on fishing lot boundaries in relation to protected areas; (ii) limited enforcement of the fishery policy and regulations; (iii) limited community experience in fishery management; (iv) unclear size of fishing lots, and illegal use of prohibited fishing gear and fishing activities during the fish spawning period. Also, when faced with limited fish yields to support their livelihoods, local fishers started undertaking other activities that easily become unsustainable when they are not properly organized, such as extraction from inundated forests, collection of fuelwood and production of charcoal, or hunting waterfowl and wildlife.

Regarding species used in aquaculture, although the importance of using native species is known, there is a shortage of suitable indigenous fish species for aquaculture production and insufficient support to carry out studies to identify them.

As stated in the 2016 Cambodia‟s National Biodiversity Status Report Update, the Fisheries Administration developed, in collaboration with World Fish and the Inland Fisheries Research and Development Institute (IFReDI), a comprehensive fish species list for Cambodia. "There are growing concerns that the trend in reducing fish species diversity is a sign of unsustainable harvest and potentially a tipping point for the fishery. Furthermore, there is a trend toward increased damming of the Mekong and its tributaries, which could further impact fish species diversity as stream flows and migration routes are altered. As highlighted in Cambodia‟s Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Government has taken quite strong action, by removing the previous fishing concesssions on the Tonle Sap Lake while also promoting aquaculture and community fisheries. […] Fish diversity in Cambodia, across both fresh and salt water systems includes 1357 species".

2.

Issues

The following are key issues surrounding freshwater fisheries and aquaculture: (a) Information deficiencies, limited knowledge about the fishery resources, and poor statistics especially for capture fish;

(b) Destructive fishing practices; (c) Overexploitation of fisheries (illegal fishing and over-fishing); (d) Shortage of suitable indigenous fish species for aquaculture production; (e) Development of dams, irrigation and flood control programs that negatively impact fish habitats; (f) Insufficient protection of critical aquatic habitat (fish sanctuaries); (g) Weak law enforcement; (h) Insufficient or lack of demarcated fishing areas, and of flooded forest and zones/areas within approved areas for fishery conservation and management; (i) Insufficiently trained fishery staff for development of community fisheries; (j) Improper management skills and training by communities; (k) Limited understanding of local fishers of relevant legislations concerning the conservation and management of aquatic fishery resources (l) Lack of management plans for a number of fishery management and conservation areas; (m) Lack of a trans-boundary fishery management body between Cambodia and the Lao PDR; (n) Poorly documented impact of climate change on aquatic fishery habitats and aquatic species; (o) Limited assessment, monitoring and evaluation of aquatic fishery resources; (p) Flood destruction of forest boundaries; and (q) Market distortions, perverse subsidies and transboundary issues.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues: (a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about freshwater resources including fish varieties used in aquaculture; (b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the major direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures; (c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, and thus enhance the benefits to all in Cambodia; (d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for sustainable freshwater fisheries and aquaculture.

Many actions identified under the following themes will contribute directly to the achievement of the strategic objectives relating to freshwater fisheries and aquaculture resources: Protected Areas System and in situ conservation (Theme 1), Threatened species (Theme 2), Water Resources and wetlands (Theme 7) bearing in mind that freshwater fisheries and aquaculture are highly dependent on water resources, Biodiversity and Climate Change (Theme 8), Customary use and traditional knowledge (Theme 16), and the themes under the enabling environment cluster.

The implementation of actions under the freshwater fisheries and aquaculture theme will contribute primarily to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 4 and 5 on the sustainable management of freshwater fisheries and aquaculture, and also to the following Targets: 1 (regarding awareness for the values, status and trends of marine and coastal biodiversity), 6 (on restoration of ecosystems that have been under a lot of pressure), 8 (regarding the increase in the surface of fish sanctuaries), and 16 (calling for the reduction of pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems). The improved management and conservation of fisheries resources, as well as the development of sustainable fisheries resources will contribute to ensuring food security, it will enhance livelihoods and the nation‟s prosperity.

The chances of success are high, which should serve as encouragement to undertake the actions listed above. Indeed, in Cambodia (i) resources are vast with a wide range of accessible fishing techniques and technologies, good indigenous technical and environmental knowledge, and a high domestic and international demand; (ii) there are many examples of the successful application of community-based management; and (iii) there is a strong history of fish farming in a diversity of forms and levels, and of good traditional processing skills with low energy requirements.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

74

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "Sustainable sheries and A

quaculture" Strategic Objectives

2.1.6 Shortage of suitable indigenous fish species for aquaculture production. 2.1.5 Insufficient dem arcation or lack of dem arcation of fishing areas and lack of protection of critical; and 2.1.4 Invasive alien species; 2.1.3 D evelopm ent of dam s, irrigation and flood control program s; 2.1.2 Illegal fishing and over-fishing; Key Actions

Coopmjective 1: entory, monitor and enhance awareness about esources including fish varieties used in .

1.1 Identify and inventory freshw

ater fisheries and aquaculture and develop national fisheries statistics including on abundance of catches and trends at sites.

M A FF

1.2 C

arry out assessm

ents of

a.

Traditional know

ledge and custom

ary protocols relating to fisheries;

b.

Technology available in fisheries, and also for aquaculture;

c.

Status and trends of fisheries and aquaculture production; and

d.

C om

m ercial value of fish varieties.

M A FFG SSD

1.3 Enhance aw

areness about the status, trend, value of and threats to fisheries and aquaculture resources.

M A FFjective 2: describe the major direct and indirect factors s that are negatively im

pacting C

am

bodia's isheries and aquaculture; and apply, as , preventive and corrective measures.

2.1 A

ssess the im

pact of the follow

ing factors on aquatic resources: 2.1.1

D estructive fishing practices;

M A FF

M A FF

M A FFM O W

G SSD

M A FF

M A FF

M A FF

National Biodiversity Strategy an

75

2.9 Expand rice field fisheries, having in m ind the 15% annual increase targeted in the Strategic Planning Fram ew ork 2010-2019 for Fisheries - C am bodia to reach 500,000 tonnes per year by 2019. 2.2 D evelop and im plem ent m anagem ent plans. 2.3 D em arcate and m anage fisheries areas sustainably by establishing boundaries, ensuring local com m unity participation, revising the burden books, and objectively supervising fishing lot operators and controlling fishing gear. 2.4 D evelop and im plem ent the fisheries conservation and protection program : through the developm ent of aquaculture and of a com prehensive com m une-by-com m une environm ental education program ; by placing em phasis on protecting and m anaging natural vegetation as fish habitats and by establishing fish sanctuaries; by protecting fish habitats and other fish conservation areas, preventing the destruction of flooded forest, w hich is a fish habitat, and preventing fishing in conservation zones. 2.5 D evelop and im plem ent a critical fisheries ecosystem m onitoring and protection program to identify and m onitor priority areas and establish fish sanctuaries. 2.6 Im plem ent the C om m unity Fisheries D evelopm ent: C om m unity-based fisheries m anagem ent program , and include staff training, m anual developm ent and budgetary support. 2.7 Im plem ent the Tonle Sap G reat Lake Floodplain integrated m anagem ent program , including land-use planning, resource zonation, com m unity developm ent, sm all scale industrial developm ent, fish and agriculture products processing, and the involvem ent of local authorities. 2.8 Further develop aquaculture: Indigenous fish aquaculture developm ent project (including the prom otion of native fish production) and expand aquaculture, having in m ind the 15% annual increase targeted in the Strategic Planning Fram ew ork 2010-2019 for Fisheries - C am bodia to reach 185,000 tonnes per year by 2019.

M A F

M A F

M A FM O E

M A FG SSD

M A F

M A F

G SSD

M A F

M A F

National Biodiversity Strategy an

76

2.10

R estore/rehabilitate degraded or lost inland w

aters.

M A F

2.11

Prom

ote traditional know

ledge and custom

ary sustainable use.

M A F

G SSD

2.12

M odernize fisheries (m

odernization of the traditional system

s of extensive resource use).

M A F

2.13

R educe pressure on the w

ild fisheries resource through livelihood diversification.

M A F

2.14

Protect the w

etlands ecosystem

from

the effects of deforestation, land conversion and pollution.

M A F

2.15

Im prove the post-harvest fish processing, and prom

ote national m

arkets and export of harvested fish and processed fish.

M A F

2.16

A ddress endangered species (see detailed actions under them

e 2 above).

M A Fjective 3: strengthen measures that have a positive eshwater fisheries and aquaculture, and thus  benefits to all in Cambodia.

3.1

Support protected areas and conservation areas, including by stopping fishing in those areas.

M A F

3.2

A pply custom

ary sustainable use practices.

M A F

G SSD jective 4: he enabling environment for sustainable isheries and aquaculture.

4.1

Form

ulate a national sustainable fishery policy and action plan.

M A F

4.2

Em

pow

er local com

m unities and the private sector, including com

m unity fisheries, aquaculturists, and fish processors in order to develop and sustainably m

anage fisheries resources.

M A F

4.3

Ensure land security for the protection and grow

th of the fisheries sector.

M A F

4.4

Im prove the livelihoods of poor people by enhancing their capacity to use fish resources m

ore effectively after capture in order to add value.

M A F

National Biodiversity Strategy an

77

4.13 D evelop and im plem ent m onitoring, evaluations and reporting program m es. 4.5 Prom ote and support research and international cooperation, particularly w ith the FA O and other U nited N ations organisations and program m es, as w ell as international research organizations dealing w ith fisheries and aquaculture. 4.6 Strengthen cooperation in the context of the im plem entation of the C B D , the R am sar C onvention, the C onvention on International Trade in Endangered Species of W ild Flora and Fauna (C ITES) and the C onvention on M igratory Species (C M S). 4.7 Strengthen cooperation w ithin the country and regionally/trans-boundary (M ekong B asin) in order to exchange experiences and expertise and better coordinate and com plem ent resources. 4.8 Ensure sustainable access to fisheries resources for poor rural com m unities through fisheries reform . 4.9 M obilize financial resources including for law enforcem ent. 4.10 D evelop and im plem ent a com m unication, education and aw areness-raising strategy and prom ote, in particular, sustainable fishery practices on the national and local levels of governm ent and in com m unities. 4.11 D evelop fishery institutions and their infrastructure. 4.12 Integrate the need for sustainable fisheries in developm ent, sectoral and intersectoral strategies, and plans.

M A FG SSD

M A F

M A F

M A F

G SSD

M A F

M A FM O E

M A F

M A F

M A F

Theme 11: Sustainable Coastal and Marine Resources Management

1. Background

Cambodia‟s 435 km of coastal area and 500,000 km2 marine Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) constitute ecologically and biologically rich areas where some of the well-known threatened marine mammals such as the dugong, marine dolphins and whales, and marine turtles and molluscs can be found.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, reliable information on the status of fish stocks was not available. However, it was known that the fishing zones closest to the shore were overharvested by artisan fishers lacking the capacity to sail into higher seas and that there was a lot of illegal fishing through the use of illegal fishing gears and in the off-season. Mangroves were severely affected by wood harvesting for charcoal production and other uses, urbanization and other development work, and intensive shrimp aquaculture. Coral reefs and seagrass beds that are highly critical to marine productivity were also threatened by offshore oil and gas exploitation and the associated pollution. Many watersheds were degraded and coastal zones eroded or polluted by oil spills and other human activities. The capacity of the Fisheries Administration, then Department of Fisheries, in preventing illegal fishing, and monitoring the marine and coastal resources was limited by a lack of technical capacity, inadequate equipment and budget constraints.

Thus the objectives and actions put forward in the 2002 NBSAP focused on monitoring the status of marine species and their habitats, on setting up a Monitoring Surveillance and Control (MSC) Plan for industrial fishing and developing one for artisan fishery, on protecting coastal zones in particular the mangroves; and on improving the technical capacity of the Department of Fisheries.

Significant progress was made on all the objectives and actions adopted in the 2002 NBSAP. For example:

(a) Pollution by oil spills, overfishing in the coastal areas, use of illegal fishing gears and fishing out of season were significantly reduced over the years;

(b) Watershed and mangroves areas requiring protection or restoration have been identified and protected, while many degraded mangroves are undergoing replanting. In fact, Cambodia undertook a wide initiative of habitat protection, also taking climate change into account, through the designation and protection of important habitats including mangrove, sea grass, fish conservation areas and coral reef, and some other important aquatic habitats. Cambodia used community-based approaches and included the marine species under the sub-decree on aquatic endangered species (also see theme 2 above on threatened species);

(c) Cambodia also undertook a number of capacity building projects, including training of personnel in coastal zone management techniques, education programs on climate change and adaptation in the coastal area to help the communities adapt to the climate change, as well as better understanding the value of biodiversity in adapting to or mitigating greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions through mangrove restoration, for example. Training was also provided to the local community on patrolling and the sustainable use of marine and coastal resources28.

(d) In 2005, the Government promulgated a Sub-decree on Community Fisheries and other relevant instruments: the 2005 fisheries policy statement and 2006 Fisheries Law to strengthen community-based development of fisheries sector, sustainable use and management of areas released from fishing concession, enhancement of natural fish stock, protection of fish sanctuaries and endangered aquatic species29;

(e) Also, the Government undertook to create an integrated coastal zone management system with support from the Government of Denmark30;

(f) Mariculture systems were encouraged to ensure a sustainable fish supply and avoid threatening some fish species. The 2006 Law on Fisheries made general provisions on mariculture authorizations.

2.

Issues

Despite the progress made since 2002, there are still many issues relating to coastal and marine resources:

(a) Inadequate information on fish stocks, and on marine and coastal resources in general;

(b) Knowledge gaps and lack of scientific information regarding the description of areas meeting the ecologically or biologically significant areas (EBSA) criteria, vulnerable marine ecosystems (VME) and particularly sensitive sea areas (PSSA); (c) Watershed degradation; (d) Coastal erosion and depletion of mangroves; (e) Climate change; (f) Invasive alien species; (g) Over-harvesting of high value marine and coastal resources and fishing out of season; (h) Use of illegal fishing gears and by-catch of non-target or protected species; (i) Pollution caused by oil spills and other human activities that can result in physical damage, non-physical disturbances or biological disturbance; (j) Weak management, surveillance and enforcement capacity of the Department of Fisheries; (k) Non-sustainable coastal aquaculture; (l) Lack of a trans-boundary fishery management body between Cambodia and Thailand; (m) No assessment of abundance of marine mammals, sea grass and coral reefs; (n) Lack of marine mammal stranding network to rescue stranded animals; (o) Lack of regulation to manage marine ecotourism activities at a number of sea grass and (p) coral reef areas;

(q) Local fishers‟ limited understanding of relevant legislations concerning conservation and management of aquatic fishery resources.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues (a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about coastal and marine resources.

(b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s coastal and marine resources; and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures (c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on coastal and marine resources and thus enhance the benefits from coastal and marine resources to all in Cambodia

(d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the strategic objectives and actions identified for coastal and marine resources.

Many actions identified under the following themes will contribute directly to the achievement of the strategic objectives relating to marine and coastal resources: Protected Areas System and in situ conservation (Theme 1), Threatened species (Theme 2), Water Resources and wetlands (Theme 7), Biodiversity and Climate Change (Theme 8), Forest Resources in particular mangroves (Theme 9), Customary use and traditional knowledge (Theme 16), and the themes under the enabling environment cluster.

The implementation of actions under the marine and coastal resources theme will contribute to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 1 (regarding awareness for the values, status and trends of marine and coastal biodiversity), 8 (regarding the doubling of the coverage of marine and coastal protected areas), 15 (on the reduction of anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs and vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate change), and 16 (calling for the reduction of pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems).

National Biodiversity Strategy an

80

ey actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "Sustainable arine R

esources M

anagem

ent" Strategic Objectives

2.1 G ather inform ation on the physical degradation and destruction of key m arine and coastal habitats and assess their biological and socio-econom ic consequences Key Actions

Coopmbjective 1: ventory, monitor and enhance awareness about  marine resources.

1.1

Identify com

ponents of m

arine and coastal ecosystem

s w hich are critical to the functioning of the ecosystem

s and im

portant for sustainable developm

ent and poverty eradication. In particular, conduct com

prehensive national assessm

ents, including retrospective analyses, of fisheries, both com

m ercial fisheries as w

ell as sm

all-scale fisheries, to determ

ine the level of unsustainable fishing practices;

M A FG SSD

1.2 Identify m

arine and coastal areas m

eeting the ecologically or biologically significant areas (EB

SA ) criteria, w

ithin and, if possible, beyond national jurisdiction, and vulnerable m

arine ecosystem

s (V

M E) and particularly sensitive sea areas (PSSA

)

M A F

1.3

C arry out an assessm

ent of the status and value of m

arine and coastal biodiversity in relation to the types and levels of hum

an activity in areas described as m

eeting the EB

SA criteria, taking into account traditional know

ledge

M A F

1.4 R egarding coral reefs,  (a) M ap and assess the vulnerability of coral reefs; (b) C

arry out research on resilience and resistance to bleaching and raised tem

perature; and  (c) A nalyze the status and trends of coral-reef ecosystem

s, as w

ell as the ecological and socio-econom

ic im pacts of coral-reef degradation and destruction

M A F

1.5 Enhance aw

areness about the status, trends, value of and threats to m

arine and coastal resources across the governm

ent and society

M A Fbjective 2: d describe the direct and indirect factors and hat are negatively im

pacting C

am bodia's coastal

M A F

National Biodiversity Strategy an

81

e resources; and apply, as appropriate, preventive tive measures

2.2 D

evelop and im

plem ent m anagem

ent practices, m

ethodologies and policies, including in particular restoration of m

angroves and rehabilitation of dam

aged coral, to reduce and m

itigate the im

pacts of physical degradation and destruction of key m

arine and coastal habitats on the provision of services from

m arine and coastal ecosystem

s.

M A F

2.3 Protect m

angrove forests through adequate land-use plans, and local com

m unity involvem

ent

M O EM LM

2.4 U

ndertake direct action to protect the m

arine and coastal environm

ent from negative im

pacts by prioritizing ecologically or biologically significant areas

M A F

2.5 Establish and m

aintain m

arine and coastal protected areas that are representative, effectively m

anaged, ecologically based, and w

ell connected and integrated in the w

ider land- and seascape

M A F

2.6 D

evelop m

onitoring and m

anagem

ent program

s for target fish species

M A F

2.7 D

evelop a full M

onitoring Surveillance and C

ontrol (M

SC ) Plan for industrial fishing and establishm

ent of a w

orking pilot schem

e for M

SC of artisan fishery, including aw

areness and training

M A F

2.8 C

ontrol, under national jurisdiction, activities and processes that m

ay have significant adverse im

pacts on deep seabed ecosystem

s and species beyond the lim

its of national jurisdiction, in order to address A

rticle 3 of the C onvention on B

iological D

iversity

M A F

2.9

U ndertake actions to reduce and control sea-based sources of pollution

M A F

2.10

A chieve substantial progress in protecting the m

arine environm

ent from

land-based activities through effective application of the G

lobal Program

m e of A

ction for the Protection of the M

arine Environm

ent from

Land-based A

ctivities

M A F

2.11

D evelop national coral reef action plans and program

m es m obilizing inter-agency and cross-sectoral partnerships, as w

ell as close coordination

M A F

National Biodiversity Strategy and

82

am ong national and subnational governm

ents and local com

m unities to address the m

ultiple anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs, taking into account actions under other relevant them

es, such as on fisheries or on clim

ate  2.12

Prevent or m

inim

ize the negative im

pacts of m

ariculture on m

arine and coastal biodiversity and enhance any positive effects of using native species.

M A FF

2.13

Prevent the introduction of invasive alien species into the m

arine and coastal environm

ent, and eradicate, to the extent possible, those invasive alien species that have already been introduced.

M A FF

2.14

Prom

ote com

m unity-based m

easures to m

anage fisheries sustainably

M A FF

2.15

Identify and im

plem

ent m

anagem

ent m

easures for m

ultispecies reef fisheries to reduce unsustainable fishing practices;

M A FF

2.16

Sustainably m

anage populations of key reef fish and invertebrate species targeted by export-driven fisheries

M A FF

2.17

Strengthen regional and international cooperation to address issues related to the m

anagem

ent of m

arine resources and ecosystem

s.

M A FFbjective 3: r strengthen measures that have a positive impact and marine resources and thus enhance the om coastal and marine resources to all in Cambodia

3.1 Im

prove m

anagem

ent effectiveness of established protected and conservation m

arine and coastal areas.

M A FF

3.2 R

estore to and m

aintain fisheries stocks at sustainable levels

M A FFbjective 4: the enabling environment for the implementation tegic objectives and actions identified for coastal e resources.

4.1 A

ssem

ble a database on m

arine and coastal biodiversity status and trends, threats, and m

anagem

ent, and m

ake it w

idely accessible in the national clearing-house m

echanism

M A FF

G SSD

4.2 Strengthen collaboration and harm

onize initiatives w

ith activities under other relevant conventions and organizations.

M A FF

G SSD

National Biodiversity Strategy an

83

4.10 C reate alternative sources of livelihood for local fishing com m unities, so as to reduce pressures on m arine resources 4.3 W ithin the fram ew ork of integrated m arine and coastal area m anagem ent (IM C A M ), integrate biodiversity concerns in all socio-econom ic sectors that im pact the m arine and coastal environm ent 4.4 U pdate and strengthen existing legislation, as w ell as institutions dealing w ith m arine and coastal issues 4.5 Introduce new or strengthen existing national regulations and m anagem ent m easures, including the application of the ecosystem approach to fisheries to address unsustainable fishing practices, such as overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated (IU U ) fishing and destructive fishing practices, and ensure effective enforcem ent; 4.6 Strengthen capacity in m arine science, research, inform ation and m anagem ent, technology transfer and acquisition, through education, other types of training, and public aw areness, to im prove im plem entation of the actions under this them e 4.7 C apacity-building and training program for staff on coral reefs 4.8 Provision of patrol boats to D epartm ent of Fisheries 4.9 Identify diverse funding m echanism s and m obilize financial resources for im plem entation

M A F

G SSD

M A F

G SSD

M A F

G SSD

M A F

G SSD

M A F

M A F

M A F

G SSD

M O E

Theme 12: Sustainable Animal and Wildlife Resources Management

1. Background

Cambodia is host to a great diversity of animal and wildlife of significant importance in the lives of the people and for the functioning of ecosystems. The 2002 Forestry Law states that all wildlife species are state property and components of forest resources, including the mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, insects, other invertebrates, and their eggs or off spring. Wildlife management, research and conservation are administered under the General Secretariat for Sustainable Development (GSSD) of the National Council for Sustainable Development (NCSD), the General Directorate of Administration for Nature Conservation and Protected (GDANCP) of Ministry of Environment, and the Forestry Administration. The Department of Biodiversity of GSSD and the Department of Wildlife and Biodiversity in the Forestry Administration are jointly responsible for developing biodiversity conservation and wildlife management plans, as well as ecological monitoring, surveying, and research.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the primary issues affecting animal and wildlife resources in the country were (i) the threat to their survival from illegal hunting and trade, overexploitation, habitat destruction and degradation, pollution and invasive alien species, and (ii) the limited information available regarding their status.

The strategic objectives and priority actions for animal and wildlife resources were articulated around the reduction of illegal hunting and trade through awareness campaigns, the reduction of the impact of invasive alien species, monitoring of the status and exploitation levels of wildlife, and development of management plans for commercial animals and wildlife species. Each of those actions is on-going and some progress has been made in achieving the objectives that were established, but much remains to be accomplished. Indeed, the status of wildlife is available, but it requires updating; illegal hunting has been reduced, but its incidence continues to remain too high; and invasive alien species have been identified, but the resources required to control the impacts of those species effectively are insufficient.

In order to conserve and protect some landmark species of flora and fauna, additional production forest areas have been designated, including 12 Protected Forests and 8 Biodiversity Conservation Areas. Of the 23 Protected Areas under the MOE, 10 are Wildlife Sanctuaries. Local communities are involved in in-situ conservation of animal and wildlife and local villagers cooperate in projects.

With regard to ex-situ conservation, the government administered "Wildlife Rescue Centre" located within the Phnom Tamao Zoological Park confiscates wildlife that has been illegally traded in the country. Other ex-situ wildlife management centres include the Prey Angkor Zoo (private), the Angkor Centre for Conservation Biology (private), the Wildlife Development Centre in Kampot province (private) and Koh Kong Safari World, each of which has been developed by the private sector.

Cambodia is also involved in trans-boundary biodiversity conservation. In recognition that wildlife freely crosses national boundaries and moves from one country to another along neighboring borders, Cambodia participates in the conservation of biological resources through the implementation of the ITTO Trans-boundary Biodiversity Conservation project, the ADB Biodiversity Corridors Initiative and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations‟ Wildlife Enforcement Network.

2.

Issues

The primary issues regarding the current status of animal and wildlife resources in Cambodia include:

(a) The lack of detailed and updated information on the status and trends of, and threats to, wildlife because of inadequate technology and limited human and financial resources required for monitoring. Some development partners, environmental NGOs and a few research institutions continue to gather that information, but on a limited scale;

(b) Conservation and degradation of wildlife habitats caused by the demand for timber,

(c) especially luxury species of high-priced timber, unsustainable extraction of non-timber forest products, land cleared for plantation crops and agriculture, road constructions and other public works increased access to wild lands, urban expansion, mining, and pollution;

(d) Illegal and unsustainable hunting and fishing. The scale of Cambodia‟s illegal wildlife trade is substantial, driven by international demand for meat and traditional medicines in neighboring countries. The trade leaves areas of apparently "healthy" forest devoid of wildlife, with significant populations of many species surviving only in extremely remote areas or those protected by intensive conservation measures;

(e) There is no specific legislation to address invasive alien species (IAS) issues, as well as limited information and human and financial capacity to address those issues that are associated with invasive alien species.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address these issues:

(a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness of animal and wildlife resources.

(b) Strategic objective 2: Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors and processes that are impacting Cambodia‟s animal and wildlife resources and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures.

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the actions identified for the conservation and sustainable use of animal and wildlife resources.

Implementation of actions identified under this theme will benefit from actions to be undertaken under several other themes, as well, in particular Theme 1 on protected areas system and in situ conservation; Theme 2 on threatened species; Theme 3 on ex-situ conservation; and a number of other themes, including those on water resources and wetlands (Theme 7); biodiversity and climate change (Theme 8); land-use planning (Theme 6); forest resources (Theme 9); customary use and traditional knowledge (Theme 16); as well as those relating to the enabling environment. The implementation of these actions will also contribute to the achievement of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets on awareness-raising (Theme 1), identification of threatened species and improving their status (Theme 10) and halving the rate of loss of natural habitats and reducing habitat fragmentation and degradation, over harvesting and the introduction of invasive alien species and their impacts (Theme 12).

National Biodiversity Strategy and

86

ey actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "Sustainable ildlife R

esources M

anagem

ent" Strategic Objectives

1.1. C ontinue taxonom ic and ecological studies on anim al and w ildlife, and consolidate the available inform ation on anim al and w ildlife in databases and through the national clearing-house m echanism . 1.2. Identify anim al and w ildlife resources and assess their values, status and trends, and m anage and share that inform ation in user-friendly databases as w ell as through the national clearing-house m echanism . 1.3. A ssess the current status of invasive alien species im pacting anim als and w ildlife in the country. 1.4. D evelop a national m onitoring program and associated database on invasive alien species. 1.5. Enhance aw areness of the status, trends, values of, and threats to anim al and w ildlife resources. 2.1 U ndertake national cam paigns against illegal hunting. 2.2 U ndertake national behavior change cam paigns to reduce dem and for bushm eat am ong the urban m iddle and upper classes. 2.3 Establish additional national parks, w ildlife reserves, w ildlife rescue centers and zoos, and restore w ildlife habitats that have been degraded. 2.4 D evelop alternatives to bushm eat, for exam ple through anim al dom estication and breeding. 2.5 Ensure effective site-based protection through im proved law enforcem ent Key Actions

Coorpaministrbjective 1: ventory, monitor and enhance awareness of  wildlife resources.

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF, bjective 2: d describe the direct and indirect factors and at are im

pacting C

am bodia's animal and wildlife nd apply, as appropriate, preventive and easures.

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

National Biodiversity Strategy and

87

and patrolling in protected areas system

. 2.6 Establish inform

ant netw

orks against illegal poaching around critical protected areas.

M A FF,

2.7 Increase support for law

enforcem

ent efforts in areas already protected through additional hum

an and financial capacities, and enhance collaboration w

ith local com

m unities, indigenous ethnic m

inorities and developm

ent partners, as w

ell as natural resource m

anagem

ent and environm

ental N

G O s.

M A FF, bjective 3: the enabling environment for the implementation ns identified for the conservation and sustainable al and wildlife resources.

3.1 D

evelop and im

plem

ent aw

areness-raising program

m es and a national strategy for Invasive A

lien Species m

anagem

ent.

M A FF,

3.2 C

oordinate w

ork w

ith governm

ent institutions, civil societies, the private sector and w

ildlife conservation organizations to increase efficiency and synergies w

hile avoiding unnecessary duplication of effort, and engage local com

m unities and indigenous ethnic m

inorities to strengthen their roles in land-use planning and ecosystem

m anagem

ent.

M A FF,

3.3 U

pdate legislation/regulations and ensure their effective enforcem

ent.

M A FF,

3.4 Enhance im

plem

entation of C

ITES related provisions in the relevant national law

s

M A FF,

3.5 M

obilize funds for w

ildlife conservation and sustainable use exploring diverse sources of financing, including R

ED

D + and ecotourism

.

M A FF,

Theme 13: Sustainable Agriculture and Animal Production

1. Background

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia‟s economy was largely based on agriculture, mostly rice-based rain-fed and mono-cropped systems. Shifting cultivation, commercial crops planting, home gardens and perennial systems were also practiced. Agriculture employed most of the labor force. Cambodian agriculture depended largely on traditional cultivars of rice, maize, sesame, vegetables and sweet potato. New pests and pathogens have contributed significantly to the loss of land race diversity in the absence of gene banks and storage facilities. Loss of crop genetic diversity and land races, together with the improper use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers, were seriously compromising the country‟s food security.

Animal production was still limited but a shift was taking place from village level to commercial level production, and with the introduction, following other countries in Asia, of new genes in domesticated animals to boost production. However, the application of adequate husbandry techniques, sanitary measures and quality control were limited.

The challenges that Cambodia faced included the fact that: a lot of land needed to be cleared for agriculture; cropping/farming systems (in particular the use of soil and water polluting chemical fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides, the inadequacy of slash-and-burn cropping and mono-cropping and uncontrolled grazing) were not the most appropriate to respond to the food needs and food security in the country; and husbandry techniques and sanitary measures for livestock production were deficient.

When developing the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia focused on agricultural biodiversity, which is a broad

term that includes all components of biological diversity of relevance to food and agriculture, and all

components of biological diversity that constitute the agricultural ecosystems, also named agro-

ecosystems: the variety and variability of animals, plants and micro-organisms, at the genetic, species and

ecosystem levels, which are necessary to sustain key functions of the agro-ecosystem, its structure and

processes. Agricultural biodiversity provides not only food and income but also raw materials for

clothing, shelter and medicines, and performs other services such as maintenance of soil fertility and

biota, and soil and water conservation, all of which are essential to human well-being. Agricultural

biodiversity is the outcome of the interactions among genetic resources, the environment and the

management systems and practices used by farmers. It is the result of both natural selection and human

inventive developments over millennia.

Strategically, Cambodia decided to focus its objectives and actions for the decade on:

(a) The protection of agricultural land, and plant and livestock resources, including through Integrated Pest Management program;

(b) Promoting agricultural biodiversity program for food security;

(c) The training of farmers, livestock producers and fish growers on improved farming systems respectful of the environment, including for example mixed cropping, rotational agriculture and pastoral rotational grazing, the use of chemical and organic fertilizers and pesticide, water use in agriculture, and animal husbandry;

(d) Strengthening research in new and alternative crops.

Following the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, agricultural production increased remarkably in spite of unpredictable weather conditions. The livestock production also increased, but only slightly, and its contribution to the economy remained stagnant. This sub-sector needed to grow in order to meet local nutrition needs and to serve the tourism industry. Introduction and propagation of high yielding species and expanded veterinary services is a priority of MAFF.

To promote agricultural production, MAFF prepared laws and regulations including on the Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary Agreement, the Law on Production and Animal health, the 2012 Law on Management of Pesticide and Agricultural Fertilizer, and Law on the Management and Use of Agricultural Land. The enhancement of the agriculture sector is one of the four priority programme areas of the Rectangular Strategy and the 2009 National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2009-2013 which is also the country‟s poverty reduction strategy, and the Green Growth Roadmap. The 2005 Agricultural Sector Strategic Development Plan 2009-2013 and the 2006-2010 Strategy for Agriculture and Water are both aligned with the Government‟s Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in Cambodia and efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. The overarching intent of the Agricultural Sector Strategic Development Plan is to enhance agricultural productivity, diversification and commercialization in order to reduce poverty and promote economic growth alongside sustainable natural resource management. The Government‟s agricultural strategy promotes diversified farming systems, agro-forestry and protection, and the management of critical watersheds. Those strategies and their link to the maintenance of protected areas and biodiversity are considered critical to maintaining stability in agricultural systems and in ensuring food security. The significant contribution of protected areas to the supply and regulation of water for agriculture is recognized.

The issues observed in 2002 are still present, although progress can be noted on some of them: slash and burn cultivation is reduced, and the cooperation between agencies has improved. However, no study has been reported regarding genetic erosion.

Regarding implementation of the priority actions, MAFF undertook a number of programmes to address the issues:

(a) MAFF conducted several farmers' training programmes on improved cultivation and livestock production systems respectful of the environment. MAFF also strengthened agricultural extension service delivery in a more broadened and comprehensive fashion in order to bring about a wider uptake of better cultivation techniques and effective practices on soil fertility management, plant protection, use and maintenance of agricultural machinery, postharvest and storage technology. The Integrated Pest Management (IPM) training programme, for example, led to the reduction of ecology disruption and environmental contamination, to the reduction of public health and toxic residues in food, and to an improvement in the livelihood of farmers, biodiversity and marketability of produce31. MAFF established a Plant Protection Office under the Department of Agronomy and Soil Improvement, in response to Article 4 of the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) that requires contracting parties to develop National Plant Protection Organisation32.

(b) MAFF prepared an "Agriculture Sector Strategic Development Plan: 2006-2010" in October 2005 in order to achieve RGC‟s strategic goals as well as the NSDP 2006-2010 to promote agricultural diversity and agricultural productivity for domestic and external demands, and for the country‟s food security. A Strategy for Agriculture and Water Sectors was also adopted in 200733. The sustainability of agriculture is closely linked to the supply of water. Thus, the government should encourage its policy on the improvement of the irrigation systems through restoring the existing irrigation systems and building new ones to ensure there is sufficient water for farmers. These policies promote pro-poor agricultural systems and community arrangements, effective agro-business development, efficient, sustainable and pro-poor management of land and water resources.

(c) In the Green Growth Roadmap, it is recognized that agricultural productivity can be promoted and maintained in the longer term if organic agricultural practices are promoted to delay the degradation of arable lands. Sectoral diversification can be supported by increased capacity building, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET), and other initiatives by the Ministry of Labor and Vocational Training (MOLVT), and the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (MOEYS). If organic farming is promoted in rural areas and the production can be connected to the main markets, Cambodia can have the potential to become the hub for organic rice in Southeast Asia. Such capital inflow would spur private sector growth, create additional employment opportunities, and benefit international marketability and competitiveness of Cambodian products as a whole.

(d) MAFF conducted agricultural lands inventories, soil surveys and agricultural land-use assessments throughout the country. It generated data and information relevant for planning for agricultural intensification and diversification and sustainable agriculture34.

(e) Research on new and alternative crops has also been strengthened35;

The Government is conscious about the following challenges:

(a) The preservation of ecosystems with a high productivity and rich biodiversity is the primary condition for sustainable yields of renewable raw materials and products such as food crops, livestock, timber, and fish;

(b) The productivity in rice and other crops; access to extension services, credit and inputs; irrigation; ensuring better benefits for farmers through marketing; limited farmer‟s knowledge in using agricultural inputs, techniques and soil improvement management; (c) Competency in law enforcement to monitor and regulate agricultural inputs and soil resources and soil fertility management; (d) The use of land and other resources, as well as private sector investments and participation; (e) The formation of farmers so as to improve their effectiveness and partnering with private sector; and

(f) The impact of climate change and natural disasters.

Some attention needs to be paid to invasive alien species and the following recommendations from the 4th edition of the Global Biodiversity Outlook of particular relevance:

(a) Agriculture should be made more efficient, including through improved targeting and efficiency of fertilizer, pesticide and water use, reducing post-harvest losses, minimizing food waste, and promoting sustainable diets; (b) Nutrient pollution should be reduced by improving nutrient use efficiency in agriculture to reduce losses to the environment, enhancing treatment and recycling of sewage and industrial waste water, eliminating phosphates from detergents and the conservation and restoration of wetlands;

(c) Efforts should be increased to identify and control the main pathways responsible for species invasions, including through the development of border control or quarantine measures to reduce the likelihood of potentially invasive alien species being introduced, and making full use of risk analysis and international standards; (d) The conservation of the wild relatives of domesticated crops and livestock should be integrated into management plans for protected areas. Surveys of the location of wild relatives should be conducted and this information included in plans for the expansion or development of protected area networks.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Land clearance/land-use (loss of agriculture land);

(b) Soil and water pollution by excessive chemical fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides;

(c) Mono-cropping;

(d) Industrial cropping;

(e) Genetic erosion (fewer variety);

(f) Overgrazing;

(g) Negative impact of agriculture in some areas (due to water pollution from excessive use of chemical inputs);

(h) Lack of or limited cooperation between agencies;

(i) Limited investment in technology and other inputs;

(j) Limited laws and regulations enforcement;

(k) Limited integration into wider development plans, thus increased chances of conflicts with other development plans;

(l) Deficient husbandry techniques and sanitary measures for livestock production; and

(m) Climate change, natural disasters and invasive alien species.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor and enhance awareness about agricultural biodiversity, including the animal component;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Address the direct and indirect factors and processes that are negatively impacting Cambodia‟s agricultural biodiversity and are therefore impacting agricultural and animal production; and apply, as appropriate, preventive and corrective measures;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on agriculture and animal production and thus ensure food security for all, particularly for the rural community;

(d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the strategic objectives and actions for sustainable agriculture and animal production.

The implementation of the actions under these strategic objectives will greatly contribute to the achievement of the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 1 (on awareness-raising), 5 (on sustainable management of areas under agriculture and animal production) and 6 (on restoration of agricultural lands and recovery of their ecosystem services important to all, particularly local communities and women, the elderly and children of indigenous ethnic minorities). Implementation of the actions listed in Table 17 below and the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets relating to agriculture should have in mind that in the NSDS (2009),

(a) The ultimate objectives of the recommended actions are (i) to generate productive soils with high organic content, (ii) to prevent land deterioration due to erosion or loss of nutrients, (iii) avoid accumulation of pesticides and heavy metals, (iv) a rich biodiversity found within varied biotopes in the landscape, and (v) sustainable agricultural practices;

(b) The following NSDS targets for 2015 are yet to be met: (i) Target B: Achieve, by 2015, an increase of the national rice yield to 2.4 t/ha and 50% increase of non-agriculture income generating activities in rural areas; (ii) Target C: Achieve, by 2015, sustainable agricultural practices (IPM or organic agriculture) in 20% of the agricultural land; and (iii) Target D: Achieve, by 2015, sustainable land-use planning in 50% of the provinces.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

92

y actions 36 and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "Sustainabld A

nim al P roduction"

Strategic Objectives

Key Actions

Coorpamina

jective 1: entory, monitor and enhance awareness about  biodiversity, including the animal component.

1.1 Provide a com

prehensive assessm

ent of the coverage of agricultural land; of the status, trends and value of agricultural biodiversity; and the types of m

anagem

ent in C

am bodia;

M A FF,

1.2 A ssess the associated know

ledge, innovations and practices of indigenous ethnic m

inorities and local com

m unities in sustaining agricultural biodiversity and agro-ecosystem

services;

M A FF,

1.3 Prom ote public aw

areness of the goods and services provided by agricultural biodiversity, and the value and im

portance of such diversity for food, agriculture and anim

al production;

M A FF,

1.4 Enhance capacity to sustain livelihoods by expanding know

ledge, and understanding and aw

areness of the m

ultiple goods and services provided by the different levels and functions of agricultural biodiversity.

M A FF,G SSD , jective 2: direct and indirect factors and processes that ly im

pacting C

am bodia's agricultural and are therefore impacting agricultural and uction; and apply, as appropriate, preventive ve measures

2.1.

Support research that w

ill determ

ine the m

ost appropriate farm ing/cropping system

s for the various ecosystem

s in C

am bodia, addressing essentially: a.

Irregularity and, at tim

es, insufficiency of rain w

aters in rain-fed agriculture; b. U ses of chem

ical fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides; c.

A gricultural land protection and land-use program

; d.

A gricultural diversity prom

otion program

for food security, food safety, crop diversification, paying attention to soil fertility m

aintenance and balance betw

een food crops and other crops (industrial, biofuel); e.

Seed production quality; f. Farm ing system

s integrating crops, livestock, fisheries and agroforestry/forestry;

M A FF,

M O EY S

National Biodiversity Strategy and

93

3.5 D evelop infrastructure in rural areas for transporting agriculture products to the m arket; 3.4 D evelop and prom ote agricultural product exports for increased incom es and job creation; 3.3 D evelop agro-industry respectfully of the environm ent; 3.2 R eplicate and expand areas w here sustainable agriculture is practiced; 3.1 Support system s that are im proving productivity and diversification of agriculture; g. Sustainable cultivation m anagem ent system s; h. Invasive alien species; 2.2. C onserve crop, including their w ild relatives and anim al germ plasm in situ and ex situ as needed, so as to m aintain and conserve genetic diversity; 2.3. Identify and use adaptive m anagem ent practices, technologies and policies that prom ote the positive effects and m itigate the negative im pacts of agriculture on biodiversity; 2.4. Support extension services that w ill effectively prom ote the best research results, particularly in rural areas; 2.5. R eview and im prove the land tenure security, particularly for the poor; 2.6. D evelop m arket opportunities for agricultural products and address m arket distortion for an equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of agricultural products; 2.7. Im prove anim al health services, and anim al production and productivity;

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,

M A FF,G SSD jective 3: strengthen measures that have a positive impact re and animal production and thus ensure food all, particularly for the rural and indigenous unities

M A FF,

M A FF

M A FF,

G SSD

M A FF,

G SSD

M A FF,G SSD

National Biodiversity Strategy and

94

jective 4: he enabling environment for the implementation gic objectives and actions for sustainable nd animal production

4.1

Strengthen the capacities of farm

ers, in particular indigenous ethnic m

inorities, local com

m unities and their organizations, and other stakeholders for sustainable agricultural and anim

al production by: a.

Training village developm

ent com

m ittee (V

D C ) on the rules, responsibilities and village action plan; b.

Training farm

ers on im

proved cropping and livestock production system

s respectful of the environm

ent, including extension program

m es on Integrated Pest M

anagem

ent (Farm

er Field School);  c.

R aising aw

areness of agricultural diversity for food security; d.

Prom

oting agricultural engineering; e.

Im proving infrastructure in rural areas; f.

Im proving and strengthening research and extension system

s through technology transfer (including biotechnology) and the prom

otion of private sector participation, in (i) new

and alternative crops, and (ii) anim

al genetics and breeding;

M A FF,

M O EY

S

4.2

Im prove m

arket opportunity and access for agricultural and anim

al products, particularly for rural and indigenous ethnic com

m unities;

M A FF,G SSD

4.3

Take environm

entally friendly m

easures that w

ill im

prove the quality and quantity of agricultural and anim

al production and thus encourage m

arket expansion and the export of agricultural products;

M A FF,

4.4

Facilitate and take advantage of agricultural technology transfers and agricultural cooperatives;

M A FF,

4.5

Enhance aw

areness on the regulations and legislations, and strengthen law

enforcem

ent;

M A FF,

4.6 Encourage regional and international cooperation;

M A FF,

4.7 D

evelop or identify and m

obilize sustainable sources of financial resources;

M A FF,

4.8

Enhance aw

areness on guidelines and policies relating to indigenous peoples‟ rights and custom

ary sustainable use of biodiversity, in cooperation w

ith M

R D .

M A FF,G SSD

Theme 14: Sustainable Energy Resources Management

1. Background

In Cambodia, over 80 percent of the primary energy consumption is provided by fuel wood and charcoal. The domestic use of fuel wood and charcoal commonly creates severe environmental problems due to forest logging and indoor/outdoor air pollution. Cambodia‟s energy supply also relies heavily on imported fuels. With the increasing demand and increases of international fuel prices, the government has been exploring new sources of energy, including hydropower, offshore and onshore oil and gas, and renewable energy.

Energy is an important source or input for the economic and social development of any nation. Significant energy use is relevant to the nature of energy services in different sectors of the economy and to environmental constraints. Energy is required for cooking and lighting in households and for other uses of social services. This shows that energy is a vital input for the social and economic development of nations.

Many environmental problems are arising with energy supply and use that are related to global warming. Such as air pollution, ozone layer depletion, forest destruction, and emission of radioactive substances. These issues must be considered simultaneously if humanity is to achieve a bright energy future with minimal environmental impacts. There is already much evidence that the future will be negatively affected of humans continue degrading the environment.

Cambodia is heavily dependent on wood and biomass energy and will remain so in the mid-term. Not only most poor rural families rely on firewood for cooking but also industries. Forests therefore play a very important role in the national energy balance and wood and biomass energy will remain the most accessible source of energy in the mid-term.

According to World Bank biomass is the dominant source of energy used in Cambodia making up to 85% of the total energy consumption. Fuel wood and charcoal are the main form of biomass while agriculture wastes (rice straw, palm leaves, coconut shells, corn cobs, cassava, sugarcane, cashew nut shells and dung) are used to a lesser extent.

It is important note that fuel wood plays an important role for the poor and rural people. Thus attention must be given to the role wood-energy can play in alleviating vulnerability and poverty. However, the main source of fuel wood in Cambodia, natural forests, has been severely degraded due to mismanagement over the past decades. Todays, wood fuel may be available in solid (i.e. fuel wood, wood-chips, sawdust, pellets, briquettes, or charcoal), liquid (i.e. black liquor, methanol and pyrolitic oil), or gasses (producer-gas) forms.

With progressive advancement in technology, new wood fuel in the forms of charcoal, briquettes, dendrothermal power, wood-alcohol and producer-gas are used to generate heat and power, through cogeneration. Recently, both woody and non-woody biomass is being utilized in wood and agro-industries for energy generation, by using modern bio-energy technologies such as gasification for example. With the hike and fuel prices, small scale industry and in particular the textile industry have started substituting their boilers with wood, which is causing an unexpected and unaccounted for pressure on biomass resources.

The biofuel industry was showing signs of development, led by the increasing international demand and sustained increases in oil prices. The Cambodian Government through MME, negotiated with the Thai Government to support the development of biofuels in Cambodia. In Cambodia, the case study showed a very positive example of socially sustainable biofuel production that is benefiting smallholders and other villages. Farmers gained more than the basic agricultural wage, paid less for electricity and had access to Jatropha seeds cake for fertilizer. For smallholder families, who produce their own feedstock on small plots (a double row 400m fence, 1,600 m2), and consumed their own oil in tractors and water pumps the profit was USD440. The same farmer who only sells seeds makes a net profit of USD102 on the same living fence. In the past three years, there has been a dynamic expansion of smallholder production of cassava in Khampong Thom, Khampong Cham and Banteay Meanchey Provinces. Thai and Vietnamese bioethanol processing enterprises send collectors in their own trucks to buy cassava tubers directly from farmers at the farm gate. Cambodian cassava producers presently capture robust net returns of USD350 per hectare. In Cambodia, the major rice growing areas currently lie within the country‟s economic corridor between Thailand and Vietnam. Major expansion of biofuel feedstocks or other agricultural production would impact adversely on the country‟s dry forest eco-region that lies beyond the rice production areas in the Thailand-Vietnam economic corridor.

By developing the proper framework conditions and facilitating the dissemination of efficient technologies, the Royal Government of Cambodia has the opportunity to change wood-energy from a factor of deforestation to a factor of income generation and socio-economic development.

First, the present strategy recommends conducting regular national flow surveys that will provide more precise analysis of wood-energy supply/demand sustainability situation and raise awareness on the issue.

Secondly, forests are not equally distribution throughout the country and thus are locally overexploited. Technologies on use are very energy inefficient. In the mid-term considering population growth and the booming industrial sector (garment, brick), the solution to over utilization of forests is therefore to reduce demand.

Household cooking energy represents a major part of national energy consumption. The use of improved cook stoves in rural areas is limited. The dissemination of improved cook stoves supported through production facilities and distribution networks should therefore have a significant impact in terms of energy savings.

Although the industrial sector‟s demand is not significant, it is unclear how the sector will evolve in the future. The garment and brick and tile factories are respectively sustained by exports markets and the high demand of the construction sector, some of these factories use wood as their main source of energy. Energy innovations must be piloted and, if validated, disseminated to reduce the industrial sector‟s energy footprint on natural forests.

Thirdly, urban cooking energy is essentially composed of charcoal produced in Kampong Speu province. Event thought the use of firewood as a direct cooking energy is decreasing; a decrease in the total wood demand for charcoal and firewood is not expected. Without interventions, wood demand will actually increase dramatically as 6 kg of wood are needed to produce 1 kg of charcoal. Even when considering the higher heating values of charcoal, traditional charcoal-making technologies involve very low energy efficiencies. Up to 80% of the energy content of the wood used for charcoal burning in earth mound kilns is lost in the process. This trend is a serious concern as forest resources are already under pressure and modern fuel such as LPG will not penetrate the urban markets fast enough to avoid forest degradation.

Thousands of families are involved in charcoal production turning vast areas of forests into barren lands.

A specific program shall disseminate improved charcoal kilns through these communities. Charcoal technological innovations have been validated in Cambodia. Their dissemination shall be done in collaboration with the Ministry of Environment and the Forestry Administration.

Fourthly, reduced demand and substitution options will not satisfy all needs. Rural communities have legally the right to protect, manage and us forest resources. Future attention should therefore be given to forest management, plantation and certification schemes and moreover the opportunity to increase income of these managing communities. As it is not the mandate of MME, a collaboration should be sought with the Forestry Administration to harmonize strategies and to implement a wood-energy supply program.

2.

Issues

In addition to the issues described above, the following key issues were identified for consideration in the updated NBSAP:

(a) Potential impacts of energy production on ecosystems

(b) Needed technical and financial support for various tasks including data collection and feasibility studies

(c) In the case of biofuels, land availability and tenure, displacement of local communities, and food security

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1: Identify, inventory, monitor, manage information and data, and enhance awareness about the contribution of biodiversity to the country‟s energy needs,

(b) Strategic objective 2: Describe the direct and indirect impact of energy production and consumption on biodiversity components and on local communities, as well as on indigenous ethnic minorities; and apply, as appropriate, measures to avoid and mitigate this impact;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Maintain or strengthen measures that have a positive impact on energy biomass and thus enhance biomass supply for energy production in a sustainable manner and to the benefit of all in Cambodia;

(d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the activities for biodiversity-friendly energy production, including acquisition and dissemination of appropriate technologies needed for the production and processing of biomass for energy.

The implementation of the strategic objectives under this theme (see Table 18 for key actions and actors) will greatly benefit from the actions identified under the themes relating to forest resources (Theme 12), agriculture (Theme 13), water resources (Theme 7), as well as awareness, education, research coordination and development (Theme 20), clearing-house mechanism for technical and scientific cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange (Theme 24), threatened plant species (Theme 2), land-use planning (Theme 6), customary use and traditional knowledge (Theme 16), community participation (Theme 19) and resource mobilization (Theme 18).

While implementing the actions under these strategic objectives, it is important to have in mind that, as stated in the NSDS (2009):

(a) The vision for a sustainable energy sector in Cambodia is that by 2030 "Cambodia has rich renewable energy resources such as biomass, biogas, hydropower, solar and wind energy resources which are used in an efficient and environmentally sustainable way in order to fulfill all people‟s and sectors‟ needs of energy services, using a demand side management approach"; and

(b) An important target is to achieve, by 2020, a widespread use of renewable energy, including up to 30% of biogas in urban and rural areas instead of fuelwood and charcoal use.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

98

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "Sustainable sources M

anagem

ent"

Strategic Objectives

1.1 C om pile and analyze inform ation and data on the energy needs of the country, including consum ption patterns of households. 1.2 A ssess the current and potential contribution of different types/sources of energy, including biodiversity, to the country‟s energy needs and com pare their costs and benefits, taking into account production zones, village w oodlots, tree planting including in public areas, agro-forest activities, agricultural and anim al w astes, and household preference schem es for fuel substitution (crop/anim al residue, w oody biom ass, com m ercial fuels, etc.), trading patterns. 1.3 Study fuelw ood and, in general, energy biom ass flow s to assess sustainability of production and use. 1.4 A ssess the potential of biofuels in the country (sources of feedstock, costs and im pacts in life cycle) including both positive and possible negative aspects. 2.1 A ssess the current and potential im pact of the energy sector on biodiversity and its ecosystem services, including in particular a. The im pact of fuelw ood harvest on deforestation; b. The im pact of biofuel production on agricultural land and food production and security; and c. A life cycle analysis (LC A ) to assess and com pare the carbon footprint of biofuels and other sources of energy. Key Actions

Copmjective 1: entory, monitor, manage information and data,  awareness about the contribution of to the country's energy needs.

M M

M A

M M

M A M R

M M

M A

M M

M A jective 2: direct and indirect impact of energy production

ption on biodiversity components and on local  as well as indigenous ethnic minorities; and ropriate, measures to avoid and mitigate this

M M

M A

National Biodiversity Strategy and

99

2.2 Reduce the im

pact of the energy sector on biodiversity and its ecosystem

services by: a. Introducing im

proved technologies into all aspects of w

ood-sourced energy and biom

ass residue supply and dem

and chains, and im

proving efficiency of w

ood in use, and thus reducing the need for w

ood;  b.

Substituting w

ood w

ith other sources of energy such as biom

ass, w

ood residue and agricultural residues, for instance by prom

oting the use of alternative energy sources to reduce fuelw

ood use and diversify energy sources by developing and im

plem enting energy efficiency program

s for households in areas w

here fuelw

ood is lim

ited, or by using im

proved cooking stoves and/or biogas digesters for household and sm

all business; c. Prom oting fuelw

ood and m

ultipurpose tree plantations at the fam

ily and com m unity level: tree planting in public areas, agroforestry or on-farm

tree planting, village w

oodlot allocation for sustainable fuelw

ood collection, integration of w

ood fuel production into com

m unity forestry so as to ensure sustainable fuelw

ood supply and prevent negative im

pacts of energy developm

ent and use on natural ecosystem

s  (A lso see them

e 12 on Forest R

esources); and d.

D eveloping m

ore efficient charcoal production m

ethods.

M M

M A

2.3

A pply to energy developm

ent projects, in particular hydropow

er and oil exploitation projects, the V

oluntary G

uidelines on B

iodiversity-Inclusive

Im pact A

ssessm

ent (C

B D D ecision V

III/28 also adopted by the R

am sar

C onvention) and the A

kw é: K on V oluntary guidelines for the conduct of cultural, environm

ental and social im

pact assessm

ents regarding developm

ents proposed to take place on, or w

hich are likely to im

pact on, sacred sites and on lands and w

aters traditionally occupied or used by indigenous peoples and local com

m unities (A

nnex to CBD

decision V

I/7 A ).

M M M O

2.4 Prom ote the use of local natural resources for energy supply based on environm

ental sustainability, least‐cost options and equitable access to electricity services.

M M G SS

2.5

Prom ote sm

all w ater investm

ent in local com

m unity.

M M  objective 3:  or strengthen measures that have a positive impact y biomass and thus enhance biomass supply for

3.1 Support the im

plem entation of the energy sector strategy, including the M

IM E ‟s 2004 draft E

nergy Strategy listing interventions to im

prove the sustainable supply and use of biom

ass in C

am bodia.

M M

National Biodiversity Strategy and

100

uction in a sustainable manner, and the benefits bodia.

3.2

Im prove the lives and incom

e of the com

m unities, in particular the m

arginal poor, presently engaged in biom

ass supply and dem

and chains.

M R 3.3

Integrate biom

ass into the existing planning developm

ent processes such as rural and com

m unity developm

ent plans, rural electrification plans, poverty reduction strategies, and decentralized com

m une planning processes, w

ith the participation of all relevant m

inistries, particularly M

M E and M

A FF w ith its Forestry A

dm

inistration.

M M M A

G SSjective 4: he enabling environment for the implementation ies under this theme, including the acquisition ation of appropriate technologies needed for the nd processing of biomass for energy.

4.1

Form

ulate a policy and action plan for a sustainable energy system

in C am bodia based on renew

able energy, energy efficiency and dem

and side m anagem

ent.

M M

4.2

D evelop and strengthen the hum

an and technological capacity needed for the im

plem

entation of the activities identified under this them

e on energy resources.

M M

4.3

Strengthen institutions, and ensure adequate planning and the effective im

plem

entation of the energy sector strategy, the energy law

, related law

s and policies associated w

ith biodiversity conservation and sustainable use.

M M

4.4

Encourage the developm

ent of standards and energy certification to prom

ote green energy from

renew

able and sustainable sources in the country.

M M

4.5

D evelop a form

al and regulated biom

ass trading and production system

w hich ensures equitable prices, sustainability of supply and the acknow

ledgem

ent of its contribution to the econom

y, w

hile ensuring avoidance of the im

portation of fossil fuels.

M A

G SS

4.6

D evelop positive incentives from

diversified and sustainable sources and that are respectful of biodiversity, our natural capital, to secure participation of all in the conservation and sustainable use of biological and genetic resources and the associated traditional know

ledge w

hile producing energy.

M M M O

4.7

Integrate the best practices from

the im

plem

entation of the energy sector strategy in com

m unication, education, and public aw

areness program

m es, using the national clearing-house m

echanism

.

M M

National Biodiversity Strategy and

101

4.9 M obilize financial support for capacity building on techniques and research activities relating to green energy production. 4.8 Support cooperation betw een the departm ents of energy and relevant departm ents in other M inistries.

M M

M M

Theme 15: Access and Benefit-Sharing

1. Background

The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity was adopted in 2010 in Nagoya, Japan at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in its decision X/1. The Protocol, which aims at sharing the benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources in a fair and equitable way, including by appropriate access to genetic resources and transfer of relevant technologies and funding, is the result of long and delicate negotiations that started in 2005. These negotiations built on the Bonn Guidelines on Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising out of their Utilization adopted in 2002 to assist Parties when establishing administrative, legislative or policy measures on access and benefit-sharing and/or when negotiating contractual arrangements for access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing, and following the call for action by Governments at the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002.

At the same meeting in 2010, the world community adopted the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 containing Aichi Target 16, which states that by 2015, the Nagoya Protocol should become operational and be consistent with national legislations. The Protocol came into effect on 12 October 2014. Cambodia signed the Protocol in February 2012, translated it in the Khmer language and became Party on 19 April 2015.

Advantages expected from the Protocol are that37:

(a) Legal certainty with respect to access to genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from their utilization;

(b) Compliance provisions of the Protocol as well as the provisions establishing more predictable conditions for access to genetic resources will contribute to ensuring the sharing of benefits when genetic resources leave a Party providing genetic resources;

(c) The Protocol‟s provisions on access to traditional knowledge held by indigenous peoples/indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities when it is associated with genetic resources will strengthen the ability of these communities to benefit from the use of their knowledge, innovations and practices;

(d) The Protocol will create incentives to conserve biological diversity, sustainably use its components, and further enhance the contribution of biological diversity to sustainable development and human well-being. This will result from the promotion of the use of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, and the strengthening of the opportunities for fair and equitable sharing of benefits from their use.

There exist other instruments38 that support the objectives and implementation of the Protocol; including international agreements such as the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA), Guidelines on Access and Benefit-sharing in research projects or codes of conduct, International Code of Conduct for Plant Germplasm Collecting and Transfer.

The fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources is one of the three core objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity (Article 1). A framework for its implementation is provided in Article 15 of the Convention. Many other CBD provisions39 are of relevance to the objective and implementation of the Protocol. Some of the provisions in these articles are emphasized in the Preamble of the Protocol as follows:

(a) Technology transfer and cooperation to build research and innovation capacities for adding value to genetic resources can make significant contributions to sustainable development, poverty eradication and environmental sustainability, and can thereby contribute to achieving the Millennium Development Goals;

(b) Public awareness of the economic value of ecosystems and other biodiversity components, and the fair and equitable sharing of this economic value with the custodians of biodiversity are key incentives for the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components;

(c) Women play a vital role in access and benefit-sharing and therefore need to participate fully at all levels of policy-making and implementation for biodiversity conservation.

These articles and provisions of the Protocol articulate well what needs to be done by the Parties in order to implement the Protocol effectively. These articles also indicate that this theme is linked to many others in the Cambodia‟s NBSAP, such as themes 9 on Industry, Technology and Services; 15 on resource mobilization; 16 on community participation; 18 on Awareness, Education, Research Coordination and Development; or 22 on Technology and Information Sharing (CHM). At its first meeting held in 2014, the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity Serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of the Benefits Arising from their Utilization provided additional detailed guidance with regard to measures needed for capacity-building and capacity development40, and to measures for raising awareness of the importance of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge41. They were used in the development of the strategic objectives under this theme and for the identification of the key actions for the implementation of these strategic objectives.

Accession to the Nagoya Protocol and adoption of legislation and policies on access to genetic resources and the sharing of benefits from the utilization of genetic resources is important for Cambodia. There is an estimated 3000 plant species, with at least 700 additional new species. In the year 2000, 8260 plant species were found in Cambodia, 10% of which are endemic. Access to this biodiversity needs to be regulated.

Cambodia has no existing legislation on access and benefit-sharing, but government ministries and institutions recognize its importance and a process to develop such legislation and policies is underway. Access and Benefit-Sharing (ABS) is a new topic to the public. There is therefore a limited understanding of access and benefit-sharing issues, making the formulation of a national policy challenging. There is a constraint in both expertize on ABS issues and financial resources.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Limited human and financial capacity for implementing ABS policies;

(b) Lack of awareness on the ABS concept. At its first meeting, COP/MOP recognized that raising awareness amongst users of genetic resources was a priority for the effective implementation of the Nagoya Protocol and played a critical role for the overall success of the Protocol.

(c) Poor communication, networking and policy development.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues:

(a) Strategic objective 1: Strengthen Communication, Education and Public Awareness (CEPA) on access and benefits-sharing (ABS);

(b) Strategic objective 2: Develop and implement a national ABS policy and legislation;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Enhance the enabling environment for the development of ABS legislation and the implementation of the Nagoya Protocol on ABS and related legislation.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

104

ey actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "A

ccess and b

Strategic Objectives

1.1. Conduct an assessm ent of stakeholder capacities for access and benefit sharing (A BS). 1.2. C onduct a survey and assessm ent of the status of A B S education and educational m aterial. 1.3. A nalyze encountered A B S issues and identify gaps, challenges and opportunities for conducting C EPA on A B S. 1.4. Identify and distinguish target groups for form al, non-form al education and aw areness-raising program s. 1.5. Identify resources needs for im plem enting C EPA -A B S program . 1.6. D evelop and im plem ent C EPA -A B S strategy based on identified needs and national circum stances. 1.7. D evelop and im plem ent C EPA -A B S A ction Plan for individual target groups. 1.8. Establish a coordination m echanism to im plem ent the N agoya Protocol and national legislation on A B S in cooperation w ith regional and global organizations. 1.9. B uild netw orks of relevant stakeholders, including indigenous ethnic m inorities and local com m unities, academ ia, researchers, scientists and the private sector. 1.10. D evelop institutional arrangem ents to im plem ent the N agoya Protocol and establish a w ell-functioning national com petence authority and national focal points. Key Actions

CObjective 1: n Communication, Education and Public s (CEPA) on access and benefits-sharing

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

National Biodiversity Strategy an

105

1.11. O

rganize and conduct C

EPA

-A

B S events such as: training activities, sem

inars, w orkshops, public forum

s, conferences.

M

M 1.12. D

evelop educational and aw

areness m

aterials, toolkits and m

edia on A

B S and traditional know

ledge.

M

M 1.13. C

ooperate w

ith regional and global netw

orks to com

pile scientific evidence particularly for decision-m

akers.

M

M 1.14. M

ainstream

A B S and traditional know

ledge into educational curriculum

s for prim

ary, secondary and high school.

M

M 1.15. D

evelop and conduct a training of trainers program

on A

B S and traditional know

ledge.

M

M 1.16. D

evelop, m

anage, and m

aintain a user-friendly A

B S-Traditional K

now

ledge (TK

) inform

ation system

and share w

idely at the national, regional and global levels.

M

M 1.17. Em

ploy the best available com

m unication tools and internet-based system

s for A

B S activities including the C

learing-H

ouse M

echanism

.

M

M 1.18. Evaluate the effectiveness of aw

areness-raising activities and adjust the national aw

areness-raising strategy as appropriate based on feedback.

M

M  Objective 2: nd implement a national ABS policy and n.

2.1 C

om

pile inform

ation and assess existing national policy and legal docum

ents related to A

B S and traditional know

ledge, so as to identify gaps in light of the obligations of the Protocol.

M

M 2.2 Establish a legal expert team

or m

ulti sectorial legal w

orking group to review

and analyze existing national policies, strategies, codes of conduct, and other relevant docum

ents including inter alia com

m unity guidelines on natural resource use, com

m unity rights for land-use and property right policies.

M

M 2.3 Identify individual stakeholders and key institutions that can contribute in the process

of the national A

B S policy and legislation developm

ent.

M

M

National Biodiversity Strategy an

106

2.4 Identify traditional know

ledge and A

B S issues relating to the com

m ercial and noncom

m ercial uses of genetic resources to be considered for policy developm

ent.

M

M 2.5 C

om

pile good practices on TK

and sustainable use of natural resources by local com

m unity and the private sector for use in developing guidelines and for consideration in the developm

ent of A

B S legislations and policies.

M

M 2.6 Identify the nature, characteristics, key aspects, and context of A

B S policy and legislation that need to be developed.

M

M 2.7 Identify priority A

B S policies, legislation and guidelines for im

m ediate effect and action.

M

M 2.8 D

evelop an action plan for policy legislation developm

ent.

M

M 2.9 D

evelop A

B S policy and law

, including procedures for granting or refusing to grant prior inform

ed consent (PIC

), and m

easures to ensure law

enforcem

ent.

M

M 2.10 Strengthen coordination and collaboration w

ith relevant stakeholders, including private sector and civil society to support the process of A

B S policy developm

ent.

M

M 2.11 Enhance the capacity of governm

ent institutions and policy m

akers to support and adopt the national A

B S policy through consultation m

eetings, w

orkshops, conferences, and other m

eans.

M

M Objectives 3: he enabling environment for the development gislation and the implementation of the rotocol on ABS and related legislation.

3.1

Support a national focal point and one or m

ore com

petent national authorities on access and benefit-sharing.

M

3.2

Enhance participation and diversify governance, especially at the political levels.

M

3.3

A ssess capacity needs and priorities of indigenous ethnic m

inorities and local com

m unities (ILC

s) and relevant stakeholders, including the business sector and the research com

m unity.

M

G

3.4

Strengthen the capacities of indigenous ethnic m

inorities and local com

m unities, in particular w

om

en w

ithin those com

m unities, and relevant stakeholders, including

M

National Biodiversity Strategy an

107

the business sector and the research com

m unity to handle A

B S issues including for negotiating m

utually agreed term

s (M

A T).

G

3.5

D evelop m

inim

um

requirem

ents, as appropriate, for M

A T to secure the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from

the utilization of relevant traditional know

ledge.

M

G

3.6

D evelop com

m unity protocols in relation to access to traditional know

ledge and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from

the utilization of traditional know

ledge.

M

G

3.7

D evelop m

odel contractual clauses for benefit-sharing arising from

the utilization of traditional know

ledge.

M

G

3.8

Enhance technological capacities.

M

3.9

Enhance sustainable financial capacities.

M

3.10 Strengthen the existing coordination m

echanism

and cooperation am

ong stakeholders to im

plem

ent A

B S A

ction Plan and Program

.

M

3.11 Strengthen the capacity of the national com

petent authority.

M

3.12 Strengthen know

ledge and science-based decision-m

aking.

M

M 3.13 Establish internal netw

orking and prom

ote inform

ational exchange am

ong farm

ers, indigenous groups, local authorities, and beneficiaries of genetic resources.

M

M 3.14 Pilot im

plem

entation of national A

B S legislation and N

agoya Protocol on A

B S at the national and sub national levels.

M

M 3.15 Prom

ote endogenous scientific research on values of biodiversity, particularly genetic resources and on adding value to national genetic resources.

M

M 3.16 C

om

pile baseline inform

ation and data on native and non-native species.

M

M

National Biodiversity Strategy an

108

3.25 Ensure that national A B S policies are im plem ented individually or through netw orks w ithin regional, sub national or groups of users, and contribute to the im plem entation of C am bodia‟s sustainable developm ent goals including poverty eradication and the w ell-being throughout the nation. 3.17 Establish a functional A B S-C H M to prom ote A B S inform ation sharing and international cooperation to com ply w ith the national legislation and N agoya Protocol on A B S. 3.18 Enhance understanding and organize inform ation in user-friendly databases on the functioning, role, value and national requirem ents to access genetic resources for com m ercial and non-com m ercial use. 3.19 M ake inform ation on national A B S policies, relevant guidelines, and other tools of relevance to decision-m aking w idely accessible. 3.20 Encourage the w ays and m eans to respect local com m unities and traditional know ledge. 3.21 Integrate A B S issues and activities into relevant sector strategies and national. sustainable developm ent policies. 3.22 Im plem ent national A B S policy and legislation, and additional specific provisions related to A B S from relevant regional and international agreem ents. 3.23 Enhance the contribution of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources to local livelihoods and national econom y. 3.24 Ensure fair and equitable benefit sharing from genetic resource utilization and TK , w ith special attention to the m ost vulnerable groups especially indigenous peoples and local com m unities.

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

Theme 16: Customary Sustainable Use and Traditional Knowledge

1. Background

For centuries, indigenous peoples and local communities have relied on home gardening, subsistence agriculture, fishing, hunting and the gathering of plant materials for food, medicines, and the like. As a result, over time, they have accumulated substantial knowledge that is relevant to sustainable resource use and management, and the conservation of biodiversity in their traditional territories. Customary use practices are learned and applied in hands-on settings and are transmitted orally. Although these customary use practices are maintained over the years, indigenous peoples and local communities have been able to adapt them to changes in environmental, social, economic and political conditions, as needed and within the limits set by the ecosystems in which they live.

When adopting the Convention on Biological Diversity, the world community acknowledged the interconnectedness and mutual reinforcement of biodiversity traditional knowledge and customary use in the preamble, as well as in Articles 8(j) and 10(c) of the Convention. It is important to note that these articles refer to customary use and traditional knowledge that are of communities whose traditional cultural practices are "compatible" with conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.

In order to operationalize these articles, the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) endorsed a programme of work on Article 8(j) and related provisions in 2000 under Decision V/16, with the objective of promoting a just implementation of Article 8(j) and related provisions, at the local, national, regional and international levels and ensuring the full and effective participation of indigenous people and local communities at all stages and levels of its implementation. Subsequently, the Conference of the Parties to the CBD adopted additional tools of relevance to customary use and traditional knowledge:

(a) The Plan of Action for the retention of traditional knowledge, innovations and practices (Appendix of decision VII/16, E).

(b) The Akwé: Kon Voluntary Guidelines for the Conduct of Cultural, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments Regarding Developments Proposed to Take Place on, or which are Likely to Impact on, Sacred Sites and on Lands and Waters Traditionally Occupied or Used by Indigenous peoples and Local Communities;

(c) The Tkarihwaié:ri Code of Ethical Conduct to ensure respect for the cultural and intellectual heritage of indigenous people and local communities; and

(d) The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity.

In addition to the CBD, a number of other international frameworks contain provisions directly related to traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use: (i) the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, World Intellectual Property Organization; (ii) the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture; and (iii) the 2007 United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and, to some extent, (iv) the Satoyama Initiative42.

In 2010, the COP to the CBD adopted the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 with 20 so called Aichi Biodiversity Targets. Target 18 states that "by 2020, the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and their customary use of biological resources, are respected, subject to national legislation and relevant international obligations, and fully integrated and reflected in the implementation of the Convention with the full and effective participation of indigenous and local communities, at all relevant levels". Customary use and traditional knowledge are also relevant to the other targets. The CBD COP invited Parties to address customary sustainable use, in particular customary sustainable use policies, in their national biodiversity strategies and action plans, with the full and effective participation of indigenous peoples and local communities.

At its 12th meeting, the CBD COP invited the Working Group on Indicators of the International Indigenous Forum on Biodiversity and other international organizations, and particularly the Community-Based Monitoring and Information System approach, to operationalize the indicators on the status of traditional knowledge, innovations and practices and customary sustainable use of biological diversity contained in document UNEP/CBD/WG8J/8/9: "Indicators relevant for traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use"43. It was also recognized that many indigenous peoples and local communities are engaged in community-based initiatives that enhance the implementation of Article 10(c) at the national and local levels. Such initiatives include research and documentation of traditional knowledge and customary practices, education projects to revitalize indigenous languages and traditional knowledge associated with customary sustainable use of biological diversity, and community-based sustainable resource management plans. Some attention should also be given to traditional knowledge shared across borders as opportunities for international and regional cooperation.

The integration of Articles 8(j) and 10(c) of the CBD and their implementation as cross-cutting issues in the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020, the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, the national biodiversity targets, and the sustainable development goals is strategic, and a way to ensure the protection and maintenance of biocultural values for achieving human well-being. This was emphasized in the decision44 taken by the CBD Conference of the Parties at its 12th meeting in 2014 regarding Article 8(j) and related provisions, which contains in its annex the Plan of Action on Customary Sustainable Use of Biological Diversity. Parties, other Governments, relevant organizations, indigenous peoples and local communities and stakeholders were all invited to implement the plan of action on customary sustainable use of biological diversity, taking into account diverse national circumstances including legal and policy regimes, and to report progress through the national reporting process. The first task in the Plan of Action is to incorporate customary sustainable use practices or policies, with the full and effective participation of indigenous peoples and local communities, into national biodiversity strategies and action plans.

The following points45 from that Plan of Action, echoing the principles in the other international frameworks referred to above, represent an adequate basis for expressing the strategic goals and actions for the updated NBSAP:

(a) Traditional knowledge should be valued, given the same respect and considered as useful and necessary as other forms of knowledge. The CBD Secretariat developed a Traditional Knowledge Information Portal in order to promote awareness and enhance access by indigenous peoples and local communities and other interested parties to information on traditional knowledge, innovations and practices relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity;

(b) Biodiversity, customary use of biodiversity by communities whose traditional lifestyles are relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and referred to hereafter as customary sustainable use, and traditional knowledge are intrinsically linked;

(c) Indigenous peoples and local communities, through customary sustainable use of biological diversity, constantly shape and reshape social and ecological systems, landscapes, seascapes, plants and animal populations, genetic resources and related management practices. They are therefore well placed to adapt to changing conditions such as climate change, and thus contribute to strengthening the resilience of the social and ecological systems, as well as the generation of new knowledge;

(d) Customary sustainable use of biodiversity is in line with and illustrates the ecosystem approach46 and the Addis Ababa Principles and Guidelines for the Sustainable Use of Biodiversity47 (commonly referred to as "Addis Ababa Principles and Guidelines");

(e) The full and effective participation of indigenous peoples and local communities, in particular women, is of primary importance for the successful development and implementation of policies and programmes for customary sustainable use of biological diversity;

(f) Cultural, social, economic and ecological elements associated with the traditional management systems of lands, waters and territories of indigenous peoples and local communities and their involvement in the management of these areas should be recognized, secured and protected, as they contribute to customary sustainable use of biological diversity;

(g) Customary use practices are often linked to sui generis systems consisting of customary regulations, moral codes, ethical norms, and specific sanctions that help regulate equitable access to resources and help protect local resources from overuse, thus promoting sustainability. Sui generis systems guiding customary use are by definition local and therefore unique, but they are usually guided by community protocols and other mechanisms such as common principles, least damage and waste in resource harvesting and use, harvesting within the safe ecosystem limits using strategies like seasonal closures and the creation of protected areas, protection of sacred species and sites, and protection of the rights of future generations to enjoy the benefits of biological diversity;

(h) Because of the connections between customary use and traditional knowledge, it is important to consult and, as far as possible, involve indigenous peoples and local communities in all aspects of research, documentation, the establishment of related policy guidelines, and in all matters that will impact their lives or affect their wellbeing. Consideration of the right to free, prior and informed consent as reflected in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and the promotion of ethical practices of research are important in this context.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Lack of baseline survey;

(b) Pressure on land development and conversion;

(c) Customary use and traditional rights are limited; and

(d) No fair and equitable benefit sharing with indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1: Ensure that biodiversity customary sustainable use practices and traditional knowledge are valued, respected, protected and considered as useful and necessary for achieving Cambodia‟s biodiversity targets and for contributing to the country‟s sustainable development and poverty eradication;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Support and strengthen community-based initiatives that contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Apply traditional knowledge and customary sustainable use of biological diversity with the active involvement and effective participation of relevant indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

112

Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "C

ustom

ary Sand T

raditional K

now ledge"

Strategic Objectives

1.1 D ocum ent custom ary sustainable use practices, related traditional know ledge and the possible sui generis system s guiding those custom ary use practices. 1.2 Enhance aw areness of the value of custom ary sustainable use practices and associated traditional know ledge. 1.3 Integrate custom ary sustainable use practices and associated traditional know ledge in biodiversity resources m anagem ent under all relevant them es of the N B SA P w ith the full and effective participation of representatives of the local com m unities and indigenous ethnic m inorities. 1.4 O perationalize the indicators on the status of traditional know ledge, innovations and practices and custom ary sustainable use, to assess progress tow ards achieving relevant actions in the N B SA P and the C am bodia B iodiversity Targets, as w ell as in the Strategic Plan for B iodiversity 2011-2020 and the A ichi B iodiversity Targets. 1.5 V alue traditional know ledge shared across borders as opportunities for international and regional cooperation. 2.1 M obilize funds and other form s of support to prom ote and strengthen com m unity-based initiatives that contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, w ith the full and effective participation of local com m unities and indigenous ethnic m inorities, including by supporting them in their developm ent of project proposals for funding. 2.2 C ollate case studies, experiences and approaches on com m unity-based natural resources m anagem ent and m ake them available through, for exam ple, the national CH M , the Traditional K now ledge Inform ation Portal of the CBD Secretariat and the inform ation portal of the International Indigenous Forum on Biodiversity (IIFB). Key Actions

Coopmobjective 1: at biodiversity customary sustainable use and traditional knowledge are valued, , protected and considered as useful and  for achieving C

am

bodia's biodiversity d for contributing to the country's le development and poverty eradication.

M O E

G SSD

M O E

G SSD

M O E

G SSD

M O E

G SSD

M O E

G SSD objective 2: nd strengthen community-based initiatives ibute to the conservation and sustainable use rsity.

M O E

G SSD

M O E

G SSD M O P

National Biodiversity Strategy and

113

2.3

R einforce m

echanism

s that w

ill prom

ote cooperation regarding com

m unity-based initiatives am

ong the relevant regional and global agreem

ents signed / ratified by C

am bodia, including inter alia, C

B D , C

ITES, R

am sar C

onvention and the International Treaty on Plant G

enetic R

esources for Food and A

griculture (ITPG

R FA

).

M O E

G SSD objective 3: ditional knowledge and customary le use of biological diversity with the active nt and effective participation of relevant s ethnic minorities and local communities

3.1

Encourage the application of traditional know

ledge and custom

ary sustainable use of biological diversity in the planning, designing, establishm

ent and m anagem

ent of protected and conservation areas and their integration in the w

ider landscapes and seascapes.

M O E

G SSD 3.2

Encourage the application of traditional know

ledge and custom

ary sustainable use of biological diversity in the recovery of endangered species, and in the establishm

ent and m

anagem

ent of ex-situ conservation areas.

M O E

G SSD 3.3

Encourage the application of traditional know

ledge and custom

ary sustainable use of biological diversity in land-use planning, and landscape and seascape m

anagem

ent.

M O E

G SSD 3.4

Ensure the application of traditional know

ledge and custom

ary sustainable use of biological diversity in the m

anagem

ent of plant, anim

al and m

icrobial resources in all biom

es, including agricultural lands, inland w

aters, m

arine and coastal areas and forests, and other resources such as m

ineral and energy resources.

M O E

G SSD 3.5

Ensure the application of traditional know

ledge and custom

ary sustainable use of biological diversity in aw

areness-raising, research and education program

m es.

M O E

G SSD 3.6

Prom

ote the developm

ent and conservation of traditional know

ledge of the indigenous ethnic m

inorities and local com

m unities in order to m

aintain the cultures and traditions of these m

inorities, including by undertaking research and docum

entation of traditional know

ledge and custom

ary practices, education projects to revitalize indigenous languages and traditional know

ledge associated w ith custom

ary sustainable use of biological diversity, and com

m unity-based sustainable resource m

anagem

ent plans.

M R D

M O E

GROUP 3: ENABLING ENVIRONMENT (Themes 17 to 24) Theme 17: Industry, Technology and Services (Manufacturing, Biotechnology and Biosafety, and Tourism)

Sustainable Manufacturing Industry Management

1.

Background

The manufacturing industry in Cambodia is composed of a few thousand large, medium or small-scale enterprises that have either a direct or indirect impact on the environment. Garment, tanning, textile, plastic, rubber, rice milling and other food processing, fishing, wood and wood products, rubber, cement, gem mining, tube factories and construction, tourism, and oil and natural gas industries can impact biodiversity adversely through the discharge of gaseous, liquid and solid wastes that cause water, air and soil pollution. They can also have an adverse impact on biodiversity through habitat fragmentation and degradation, as well as overexploitation of biological resources.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, most factories did not have environmental management systems and there was no environmental impact assessment procedure in place for new industrial projects. Considering that increasing the environmental performance of the manufacturing industry would not only improve its efficiency but would also facilitate the selling of industrial products on environmentally sensitive international markets, the NBSAP focused strategically on awareness-raising so as to promote the use of environmentally friendly processes, adequate management of hazardous and other waste materials, environmental pollution control and monitoring systems and environmental impact assessments in the manufacturing sector.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, there have been a lot of awareness-raising programmes on biodiversity, including in the manufacturing sector, as well as considerable improvements in hazardous and other waste management, and equipment for monitoring and analyzing environmental performance of the manufacturing industry. However, awareness-raising efforts should continue to be pursued and the capacity for EIA and monitoring environmental performance should be strengthened continuously, bearing in mind the expansion of the manufacturing sector.

Over the last decade, the Cambodian economy has been shifting away from the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sector towards manufacturing, more specifically to the garment industry, which represents the largest portion of Cambodia's manufacturing sector and operates largely on the final phase of garment production. This final phase includes turning yarns and fabrics into garments, as the country lacks a strong textile manufacturing base. Agriculture is still important in rural areas, where most people depend on paddy cultivation for subsistence. The toxic pollution from laundry factories and from the garment sector, and diverse liquid and solid wastes continue to be important challenges in the manufacturing industries.

With the adoption of the Green Growth Roadmap and following the recommendations of Rio+20, Cambodia set to "develop a national strategy for greening industries: based on resource efficiency and 3R strategies; and develop measures to strengthen the national environmental industry sector". "Green manufacturing aims to reduce the amount of natural resources needed to produce finished goods through more energy- and materials efficient manufacturing processes that also reduce the negative externalities associated with waste and pollution"48.

As noted in the Green Growth Roadmap, interventions that can improve the environmental quality of waste management include: environmental awareness campaigns on community levels; the identification and monitoring of proper dumping sites; better enforcement; the education of youth on the importance of the environment; control of the importation of second hand goods; and promotion of local-level self‐ governance and leadership to improve decentralized coordination of these efforts. There is also a need to improve and effectively enforce the sub‐decree on solid waste management, applying not only to the proper management of solid wastes and/or garbage, but also to the management of hospital waste, industrial waste and other hazardous waste. Apart from sound management strategies, the RGC can also look into waste‐to‐energy options including options for bio‐digesting or waste incineration.

The promotion of green businesses and green products should be continued so as to increase resource efficiency and increase life‐cycle approaches to production of commodities. This way, waste will not be created in the first place. Such a change in products and services may be more labor intensive than business‐as‐usual, but it would also further employment generation, for instance, by promoting cleaner products to ensure sustainable development of industry. For developing countries, facilitating the green manufacturing processes can stimulate innovation and enhance international competitiveness, translating into opportunities for increasing trade and global market share49. Furthermore, manufacturing green products in specific sectors can enable developing countries to tap into growing international markets for sustainable products.

2.

Issues

The manufacturing sector is faced with a number of challenges, particularly as it relates to sustainability. These challenges include: scarcity of fresh water, energy sources and other resources or raw materials; inefficient uses of scarce resources entailing economic losses and accelerating resource depletion; pollution (such as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, particulate matter, and sulphur dioxide, among others), which accelerates not only climate change, but also degrades ecosystems and causes health risks; hazardous substances and wastes; and large amounts of energy consumption which continue to increase with the expansion of the industry. Establishing some of these industries can take up a lot of space and ends up promoting deforestation for urban development and roads; this is exacerbated in the cases where the best technologies need to be acquired.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the issues relating to manufacturing industries:

(a) Strategic objective 1: Assess the impact of manufacturing industries on genetic resources, species, habitats or ecosystems and related ecosystem services that are important for sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Prevent and, as needed, reduce possible negative impacts of manufacturing industries on Cambodia‟s important biodiversity components; and

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the actions under this theme.

The manufacturing industries under consideration greatly depend on biological resources (listed under the strategic themes in Thematic Groups 1 and 2 of this NBSAP) as raw materials. When they are well managed, they can be a source of funds for contributing to biodiversity budgets and trust funds, thus enhancing the enabling environment (strategic themes under Group 3). When they are not well managed, they can be a source of pollution and can lead to the overexploitation of biological resources and to biodiversity loss. Thus, as recommended in the 2009 NSDS, raw materials should be used efficiently and the remaining products recycled. The efficient use of materials means less waste generation.

Biotechnology and Biosafety

1.

Background

As described in the Convention on Biological Diversity, biotechnology means any technological application that uses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes for specific use. Biotechnology has applications in medicine, agriculture, food production, and non-food industrial uses of plants, as well as in environmental uses. "Modern biotechnology", which is the application of (i) in vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles, or (ii) fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family, has been proposed in the past decades for use, among other applications, to boost crop production and possibly solve the hunger issue in the world. Genetically modified crops include crops with resistance to certain pests, diseases, stressful environmental conditions, chemical treatments (e.g. herbicides), and spoilage during storage, or crops with improved nutrient profile. However, these techniques have raised a lot of concerns regarding human health, conservation of biodiversity, in particular genetic diversity.

Reports indicate that living modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology (LMOs) or other

GMOs have not yet been introduced in Cambodia or are being developed domestically. However,

reportedly some foreign companies have expressed their intention to introduce LMO/GMO crops, such as

maize and rice, into the country.

Cambodia acceded to the Convention on Biological Diversity in 1995. In Article 8(g), the Convention

calls Parties to "establish or maintain means to regulate, manage or control the risks associated with the

use and release of living modified organisms resulting from biotechnology which are likely to have

adverse environmental impacts that could affect the conservation and sustainable use of biological

diversity, taking also into account the risks to human health." In accordance with the Convention, each

Contracting Party has to take legislative, administrative or policy measures addressing the possible risks

from modern biotechnology.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia did not have any protection measures in place against living modified organisms and lacked capacity in the field of modern biotechnology. Thus the NBSAP included strategical measures to develop modern biotechnology education and capacity, including national biosafety legislation and action plan required to prevent environmental and health hazards associated with the development, use and release of living modified organisms, and protect indigenous biodiversity from living modified organisms.

After adoption of 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia acceded to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety in 2003. The objective of the Protocol is to contribute to ensuring an adequate level of protection in the field of the safe transfer, handling and use of living modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology that may have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into account risks to human health, and specifically focusing on transboundary movements.

Progress in relation to the Protocol includes:

(a) The establishment of a biosafety clearing house in 2006 with the Ministry of Environment to enhance cooperation with line agencies, the private sector, academic institutions, and for sharing information with the CBD secretariat and other Parties to the Cartagena Protocol;

(b) An extension in 2004 of the mandate of the National Biodiversity Committee to also cover biosafety issues, and the development of Guidelines50 for Risk Assessment and Risk Management of Living Modified Organisms;

(c) In 2008, the adoption of a national law on biosafety51, and the development of a draft National Action Plan on Biosafety and Biotechnology;

(d) The organization of a series of capacity-building training workshops for technical staff of relevant national and provincial institutions covering risk assessment and risk management resulting from LMOs, LMOs monitoring and management of biosafety, LMOs detection and monitoring, compliance and enforcement of transboundary movements of LMOs.52 However, these workshops need to be better coordinated and organized more efficiently;

(e) Establishment of a Secretariat of the National Steering Committee for Biosafety (NSCB), and the designation of a National Focal Point and the National Competent Authority for the Protocol, with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery being the chairperson of the Scientific Advisory Team (SAT), as well as a National Focal Point for the Biosafety Clearing-House;

(f) The Ministry of Environment organized several awareness-raising sessions including debates on TV, and produced materials for public awareness such as newsletters and brochures. Some materials such as the supplementary protocol were translated into Khmer; and

(g) The country established a biotechnology laboratory for the identification and detection of LMOs imported into the country, so as to support decision-making for issuing import approval letters.

In 2010, the Conference of the Parties served as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol adopted in decision BS-V/16 of the Strategic Plan for the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety for the Period 2011-2020 and its multi-year programme of work, with the following strategic objectives: (i) facilitating the establishment and further development of effective biosafety systems for the implementation of the Protocol; (ii) capacity-building; (iii) compliance and review; (iv) information sharing; (v) outreach and cooperation, to be implemented through a ten-year programme of work for the Protocol, supported by biennial work plans. Parties were urged to align their biosafety national action plans and programmes and their National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans with this Strategic Plan, and allocate adequate human and financial resources so as to expedite the implementation of the Strategic Plan.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Limited capacity in the field of modern biotechnology (b) Public awareness, participation and education in biosafety

3.

Strategic objective

The following strategic objective was adopted to address the identified issues.

Strategic objective 1: Further the implementation of the National Action Plan on Biosafety and

Biotechnology (2010-2014) and revise it in the context of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety and its

Strategic Plan, and assess the contribution of these activities to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, sustainable development and poverty reduction in Cambodia.

Sustainable Tourism

1.

Background

In Cambodia, tourism is the third largest economic sector after agriculture and the garment industry. This sector is rapidly expanding, with the national revenue from tourism increasing 17-fold from USD 100 million in 1995 to USD 1,786 million in 2010, and generating 315,000 jobs in the same year53. The target for the tourism sector, in terms of the number of tourist arrivals is 4.5 million by 2015, and 6.1 million international tourists by 2018, while the target for domestic tourists is 10.5 million; which is equivalent to the creation of 700,000 jobs54. Cambodia's potential for different types of sustainable tourism, including ecotourism and green tourism is immense because of the country‟s rich cultural and natural heritage. The sustainable development of Cambodia‟s tourism thereby relies greatly on the protection and preservation of the country‟s socio-cultural heritage and environment, and its biodiversity (landscapes, genetic resources used for example in the culinary art, charismatic and endemic wildlife), in addition to the development of environment-friendly infrastructures and human resources.

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia was aware of the potential impact of the expanding tourism on its natural environment from wastes, pollution and habitat degradation caused by unorganized tourism. Setting up and implementing some controls and guidelines for tourism were recognized as necessary measures for keeping the environment as healthy and intact as possible. In 2002 Cambodia was also in the process of strengthening its network of protected areas and cultural sites with the involvement of local communities as a way to contribute to the development of tourism. While increased tourism is a target, it was also recognized that the building of new roads and hotels for tourists would require care in order to prevent the negative impacts that these infrastructures would have on landscapes and the integrity of natural ecosystems. Services associated with hotel activities would also need to be well managed in order to prevent pollution and environmental degradation. In addition, Cambodia was conscious of the need to raise public awareness and train tour operators and tourism guides on the principles of sustainable and responsible tourism.

While focusing on the development of tourism activities that were respectful of the environment and that met the needs and expectations of local communities, the 2002 NBSAP provided the following strategic recommendations to:

(a) Integrate biodiversity conservation and environmental management concerns into tourism policy and development plans and guidelines, including by subjecting tourism projects to social impact assessments and environmental impact assessments as prerequisite for granting authorization;

(b) Develop ecovillage-based tourism and eco-tourism opportunities involving local communities; and

(c) Integrate tourism and conservation of cultural heritage and nature by promoting tourism in protected areas, and monitor and manage the impacts of tourism in these areas.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the Conference of the Parties to the CBD adopted the Guidelines for Biodiversity and Tourism Development (Decision VII/14) that Parties are always encouraged to apply, particularly in "tourism and conservation hotspots", areas where there is both significant biodiversity and significant pressure or potential pressure from tourism (see COP 12 decision on Biodiversity and Tourism Development in UNEP/CBD/COP/12/L. 23).

Cambodia made significant progress in improving the sustainability of the tourism sector:

(a) Life-skills are part of the education curriculum to support tourism and other key economic sectors such as agriculture and information technology, in line with the Rectangular Strategy;

(b) The Law on Tourism was promulgated in 2009. Its purpose in relation to biodiversity is to (i) govern the development of the tourism sector in a sustainable manner, effectively and qualitatively, and to reduce poverty; (ii) protect and conserve the natural resources, culture and customs, which serve as the foundation of the tourism sector; and minimize negative impacts while maximizing positive impacts of the tourism sector (Article 2);

(c) The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) developed a strategic action plan for creating environmentally sustainable tourism, creating incentives for ecotourism development, including green‐certification schemes for hotels, guesthouses and eco‐lodges. The criteria for eco‐tourism includes, among others, energy‐efficiency, composting, waste‐segregation, use of renewables such as biogas, and use of locally produced organic rice and organic products55;

(d) Community Based Tourism Development is being promoted to improve economic development and increase job opportunities;

(e) In 2010, Cambodia‟s Ministry of Tourism developed a National Ecotourism Policy and Strategic Plan, building on the understanding and appreciation of the important role that biodiversity plays in promoting Cambodia as an attractive destination56;

(f) With the adoption of the National Forest Programme strategy in 2010, Cambodia is promoting and strengthening its management of protection forests, some of which are protected for eco-tourism, and is planning to integrate tourism development wildlife protection with sustainable harvesting of wildlife resources based on sound practices and results of scientific studies and researches. A set of rules and regulations, including population census, hunting season, harvest quotas, target species, trophy fees, royalties and hunting methods need to be developed in accordance with recognized national or international game hunting practices standards as well as knowledge of target species‟ ecology.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Pollution and habitat degradation caused by unorganized tourism.

(b) Public awareness and training of tour operators and tourism guides.

(c) Construction that can take up a lot of space and promote deforestation for urban development and roads.

(d) Lack of adequate technology, knowledge and poor planning.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1: Gather biodiversity information of relevance to tourism development, including inventorying nature based-tourism sites;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Prevent tourism activities from impacting biodiversity negatively and, as needed, apply corrective measures where tourism has negative impacts on Cambodia‟s important biodiversity components;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen measures relating to tourism that have a positive impact on biodiversity and thus enhance the benefits from biodiversity and associated ecosystem services to all in Cambodia ;

(d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the actions for a sustainable tourism.

It is obvious that actions under all the other strategic themes can have an impact on the development and success of tourism in Cambodia.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

119

ey actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "Industry, T

eervices (M

anufacturing, B

iotechnology and B

iosafety, and T

ourism )"

Strategic Objectives

Key Actions

Coordparticipa

and

M anufacturing industries jective 1: mpact of manufacturing industries on urces, species, habitats or ecosystems and ystem services that are important for  development and poverty reduction in

2.6 D evelop and dissem inate guidelines for greening m anufacturing industries, including the developm ent and im plem entation of environm ental policies for the respective m anufacturing industries, based on resource efficiency and the concept of 3R (reduce resources use and production of w astes; reuse and recycle and thus be clean, w ithout polluting the environm ent; and 2.5 C ontrol industrial solid w aste and/or m unicipal w aste disposal in com pliance w ith national and international criteria and standards. 2.4 C ontrol industrial w astew ater discharge in com pliance w ith national and international criteria and standards. 2.3 R estore the sites affected negatively by m anufacturing activities. 2.2 A pply m easures to control the factors responsible of the negative environm ental im pacts of m anufacturing industries. 2.1 Identify and describe the direct and indirect factors in m anufacturing industries that are causing these industries to have a negative im pact on C am bodia‟s im portant biodiversity com ponents. 1.3 D ocum ent life-cycle of m anufactured products. 1.2 D ocum ent data and inform ation related to the w aste, air and w astew ater from the industrial sector. 1.1 A ssess am ount of w aste and hazardous m aterials from m anufacturing industries.

M IH , G

SSM O IN F, M

M IH , M

O EG SSD

, M

O

M IH , M

O EG SSD

, M

O jective 2: , as needed, reduce possible negative anufacturing industries on C

am

bodia's iodiversity components.

M IH , M

O EG SSD

M IH , M

O E

M IH , M

O E

M IH , M

O E

M IH , M

O E

M IH , M

O E

National Biodiversity Strategy an

120

3.6 B uild capacity through training w orkshops on: a. The use of environm entally friendly processes in the m anufacturing sector (Indicator: num ber of com panies reached through aw areness; cam paign or num ber of participants in training w orkshops); 3.5 D evelop m easures to orient or discipline the behavior of private actors, so as to prom ote com pliance w ith sustainability criteria along the supply chain. 3.4 A cquire equipm ent for m onitoring and analyzing, and build a database. 3.3 Enhance aw areness program s on Environm ental Im pact A ssessm ent and Environm ental Pollution C ontrol and M onitoring System for the m anufacturing sector. 3.2 Enhance aw areness of environm ental issues in the industry sector. 3.1 Enforce the legislation and policies regulating the am ount of w aste and hazardous m aterials from m anufacturing industries. 2.12 D evelop schem es for innovative environm ent-friendly investm ents. 2.11 Identify and apply incentive m easures that w ill prom ote the greening of m anufacturing industries. 2.10 Further m ainstream biodiversity into the G reen G row th R oadm ap adopted by C am bodia in 2009 and in the Sustainable D evelopm ent G oals. 2.9 R educe the environm ental im pact of existing industries and ensure that the new ones have a low ecological footprint. 2.8 Strengthen pollution control and m onitoring on the industrial areas. 2.7 Establish expert team s to guide and assist w ith the greening of m anufacturing industries. green, w ith preserving greenery, w aterw ays and the natural heritages).

M IH , M

O

M IH , M

O

M IH , M

O

M IH , M

O

M IH , M

O

M IH , M

O objective 3: n the enabling environment for the tation of the actions under this theme.

M IH , M

O

M IH , M

O

M M E, M O

G SSD

M IH , M

O

M IH , M

O

M IH , M

O

National Biodiversity Strategy an

121

3.10 M ainstream concepts of green m anufacturing in education and training program m es, including for universities, governm ent officials and the private sector. 3.9 A dopt certification or ecolabelling system s and ISO standards. D evelop clean technologies. D evelop and adopt 3R policy in m anufacturing industries. 3.8 Prom ote environm ental initiatives that are cost effective. 3.7 Establish and use biodiversity-inclusive EIA procedure for new industrial developm ent projects. b. The use of Environm ental M anagem ent System s (EM S) in m edium and large size com panies (Indicator: num ber of participants in training w orkshops and num ber of com panies using EM S); c. Establishing environm ental m anagem ent system s; and d. U sing Life C ycle A nalysis tools.

M IH , M

O E

M IH , M

O E

M IH , M

O E

M IH , M

O EG SSD

Biotechnology and biosafety jective 1: implementation of the National Action afety and Biotechnology (2010-2014) and e context of the Cartagena Protocol on d its Strategic Plan, and assess the  of these activities to the conservation and se of biodiversity, sustainable t and poverty reduction in Cambodia.

1.1.

D evelop biosafety capacity-building action plans, w

ell-coordinated at the local and national levels, for im

plem

enting the C

artagena Protocol on

B iosafety and the N

agoya - K

uala Lum

pur Supplem

entary Protocol on

Liability and R

edress to the C

artagena Protocol on B

iosafety

57.

M O C , G

SSM A FF 1.2.

Establish a national directory of hum

an resources trained and/or w

orking on subjects concerning biotechnology and B

iosafety, and assess capacity-building needs, including training and institutional needs.

M O E, M

M

G SSD

1.3.

R aise public aw

areness, and prom

ote training, education and participation concerning the safe transfer, handling and use of living m

odified organism

s (LM

O s).

M O E, M

M M O C , G

SS

1.4.

Establish regulatory (national biosafety legislation and related guidelines) and adm

inistrative (adm

inistrative rules and procedures for handling notifications and requests for approval of im

ports of LM

O s intended for direct use as food or feed, or for processing; contained use; and for

M O E, M

M

G SSD

National Biodiversity Strategy an

122

introduction into the environm

ent) rules consistent w

ith the Protocol 1.5.

Establish a system

for enforcem

ent of the C

artagena Protocol on B

iosafety.

A dopt and w

idely use guidance on risk assessm

ent and risk m

anagem

ent

M O E, M

M M O C , G

S

1.6.

Integrate biosafety issues and the im

plem

entation of the Protocol into the relevant sectors

M O E, M

M

M O C

1.7.

C arry out research to provide relevant guidance on socio-econom

ic considerations that m

ay be taken into account in reaching decisions on the im

port of living m

odified organism

s

M O E, M

M M O C G SS

1.8.

M ainstream

biosafety into national developm

ent plans and relevant sectoral policies, strategies and program

m es, including developm

ent assistance program

m es

M O E, M

M M O P, M

O

1.9.

M obilize additional financial resources and technical support for the im

plem

entation of the Protocol, as one of the m

ajor prerequisites of successful im

plem

entation of activities planned in the Protocol and w

ithin the overall fram

ew ork of the Strategy for R

esource M

obilization in support of the C

onvention on B

iological D

iversity

M O E, M

M M O C , G

S

1.10.

R evise N

ational A

ction Plan on B

iosafety and M

odern B

iotechnology in a m ore pragm

atic and im

plem

entable w

ay, contributing to environm

ental protection, biodiversity protection and taking into account risk to hum

an health

M O E, G

SSM O C

Tourism bjective 1: diversity information of relevance to

1.1 Identify areas w here there is both significant biodiversity and significant pressure or potential pressure from tourism 58

M O T, G

SSM C FA

National Biodiversity Strategy an

123

lopment, including inventorying nature m sites

2.2 A ssess the im pact of tourism on genetic resources, species, habitats or ecosystem s and related ecosystem services that are im portant for sustainable developm ent and poverty reduction in C am bodia 2.1 A pply the voluntary biodiversity-inclusive guidelines 59 for strategic environm ental assessm ent and environm ental im pact assessm ent w hen planning activities relating to tourism 1.5 Study the benefits from , and costs of, tourism to indigenous ethnic m inorities and local com m unities tourism m arkets and trends, and their expected overall positive and possible negative im pacts, at the national and regional level. 1.4 R eview the status and plans of the tourism sector, tourism policy and resource m anagem ent, access and/or ow nership by com m unities, especially indigenous ethnic m inorities and local com m unities in relation to tourism developm ent 1.3 R eview legislation and policies relevant to biodiversity and tourism including, inter alia, assessm ent of the effectiveness of any m easures for including local and indigenous com m unities, scientists and citizens. It should com prise: im portance, and on m easures taken to protect them and use them sustainably. This inform ation should com e from all sources of know ledge, 1.2 C om pile and m anage, w ithin the clearing-house m echanism , inform ation on the status, value and location of the com ponents of biodiversity of touristic a. B iodiversity resources, including protected areas and any special features and sites of particular im portance, and threatened resources. This should include a review and m onitoring of recreation, visitation and other tourism activities in protected areas, as w ell as im pacts and relevant m anagem ent processes in ecologically sensitive areas; b. C ulturally sensitive areas; c. A review of national and other sectoral plans, policies and strategies relevant for tourism developm ent and biodiversity; d. C ultural, environm ental and social im pact assessm ents

M O T, M

O G SSD

, M

C

M O T, M

O G SSD

, M

C

M O E, M

A M C FA

M O E, M

A G SSD

, M

O jective 2: ism activities from impacting biodiversity nd, as needed, apply corrective measures m has negative im

pacts on C

am

bodia's iodiversity components

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

National Biodiversity Strategy an

124

4.5 Encourage and support village-based tourism developm ent program , including the inventory of potential projects, guidelines for nature-based tourism developm ent, com m unity approach strategies, prom otion of local products, conservation of historical sites and ecosystem s, and prom otion of 4.4 Integrate the conservation of cultural heritage and nature through the developm ent of tourism program s in dem arcated areas for protected area landscapes. 4.3 Integrate biodiversity conservation and environm ental m anagem ent concerns into tourism policy and developm ent plans and guidelines, including m andatory environm ental im pact assessm ents for tourism developm ent projects. 4.2 Set up a national m aster plan to prom ote ecological tourism in protected area system s. 4.1 Prom ote com m unication, education and public aw areness activities for the general public and tourists on sustainable travel choices, and on the use of eco-labels, standards and certification schem es, if appropriate. 3.3 M axim ize the environm ental, social and econom ic benefits from tourism , including by carrying research projects for this purpose 3.2 R ehabilitate som e natural and cultural sites to add value to the sites and receive ecotourists. 3.1 Identify the benefits of tourism to biodiversity and econom ic and social developm ent, bearing in m ind that these benefits m ay take various form s, including: job creation, fostering local enterprises, participation in tourism enterprises and projects, education, direct investm ent opportunities, econom ic linkages and ecological services 2.4 M inim ize the negative im pacts of tourists on the biodiversity of tourism attraction areas. 2.3 Identify and apply m easures to reduce the negative im pacts of tourism activities

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

G SSD

, M

O M C FA jective 3: easures relating to tourism that have a act on biodiversity and thus enhance the  biodiversity and associated ecosystem ll in Cambodia

M O T, M

O M C FA

G S

M O E, G

SS

G SSD

, M

O M C FA jective 4: he enabling environment for the ion of the actions for sustainable tourism

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

M O E, G

SSM LM

U PC

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

G SSD

, M

O

M A FF, M

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

National Biodiversity Strategy an

125

4.14 D evelop and support com m unity-based tourism and ecotourism . 4.13 Increase the capacity for using biodiversity-inclusive EIA and SEA , and the A kw é: K on G uidelines to evaluate the im pact of tourism . 4.12 R e-enforce institutional arrangem ents so as to provide for the com prehensive involvem ent of stakeholders in the m anagem ent of tourism that is respectful of biodiversity. 4.11 Regularly m onitor the environm ental im pact of tourism activities, particularly in protected areas, and develop m anagem ent plans to address those im pacts. 4.10 D evelop guidelines building on best/good practices for use in training and education program m es 60. 4.9 Integrate program m es on issues relating to tourism and biodiversity into education, capacity-building and aw areness-raising. 4.8 Support the public and private sector to reach a united view on sustainable tourism and develop m aster plans for sustainable tourism for key tourism destinations in C am bodia. 4.7 Support existing m ulti-stakeholder bodies (such as the B iodiversity Steering C om m ittee and the Technical W orking G roup) so that they can prom ote cooperation, effective dialogue and inform ation-sharing w ith stakeholders, and play an effective role in resolving conflicts that m ight arise in relation to tourism and biological diversity. 4.6 In order to im prove policy developm ent and im plem entation, strengthen coordination am ong the various levels of decision-m aking in G overnm ent departm ents and agencies concerned w ith the m anagem ent of biodiversity and tourism , as w ell as agencies responsible for broader national econom ic developm ent. cultural heritage and fam ily values

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

G SSD

M O M C FA

M O T, G

SS

G SSD

, M

O M O EY

S M

G SSD

, M

O M O EY

S M

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

, M

G SSD

, M

O M O T, M

C

G SSD

, M

O M O T, M

C

G SSD

, M

O M C FA

, M

National Biodiversity Strategy an

126

4.15 B uild the capacity of national and subnational protected area and conservation area agencies to engage in partnerships w ith the tourism industry to contribute financially and technically to the operations and m aintenance of protected areas through appropriate tools such as concessions, public-private partnerships, payback m echanism s and other form s of paym ents for ecosystem services, in com plem ent to public budgetary allocations and w ithout prejudice to public m andates and obligations tow ard achieving A ichi B iodiversity Target 11 and C am bodia B iodiversity Target 8.

M O E, G

SSM C FA

, M

O

Theme 18: Resource Mobilization

1. Background

This theme is about strategic ways and means to mobilize the resources needed to advance the conservation of biological diversity and the sustainable use of its components so as to achieve sustainable development, poverty reduction, the Sustainable Development Goals and the well-being of the people in Cambodia. This theme focuses on funding, while recognizing that money alone is not sufficient to achieve the conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components as described in the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan adopted by Cambodia in 2002. Thus, although the focus under this theme is on financial resources, it is understood that resource mobilization includes also mobilization of human resources, the strengthening of institutions, acquisition and use of new technologies, introduction of positive economic incentives, enhanced engagement of business and other stakeholders, and equitable sharing of benefits from the utilization of genetic resources.

For over a little more than two decades, various projects with significant capacity-building components61 have been carried out by bi- or multilateral organizations or by international NGOs. Many of them have not achieved their capacity building objectives to the fullest and have had insufficient impact on the conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its components for the benefit of sustainable development. As noted in the 3rd National Report, The UNDP/GEF supported the Cambodia National Capacity Self-Assessment Project for Global Environmental Management, which identified gaps in terms of national capacity to ensure effective management of the nation‟s biodiversity.

Regarding financial resources, the 2002 NBSAP62 referred to financing under different themes such as protected areas and community-based management. The Strategy called for financial sustainability, the creation of favorable conditions for investors, an increase in the annual financial contribution of the government while encouraging financial mobilization at the international level, and transparency in all financial dealings related to natural resource exploitation.

An assessment of the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP twelve years after its adoption indicates that insufficient financing is a major constraint to achieving its objectives. Lack of resources is also a main obstacle in the achievement of the other biodiversity related conventions ratified by Cambodia. It is therefore critical that the updated/revised strategy and action plan for biodiversity identifies the most effective ways and means to mobilize the financial resources needed.

In 2008, the Conference of the Parties to the CBD approved a strategy for resource mobilization in support of the achievement of the three objectives of the Convention and the 2010 biodiversity target. The strategy is contained in the annex to decision IX/11 of the CBD Conference of the Parties. It aims to assist governments and relevant organizations in enhancing international financial flows and domestic funding for biodiversity, in order to achieve a substantial reduction of the current funding gaps in support of biodiversity. The strategy takes into consideration a wide range of possible local, national, regional and international funding sources, both public and private, and puts emphasis on the following during its implementation: (i) efficiency and effectiveness, (ii) synergies, (iii) innovation, (iv) capacity-building, (v) awareness-raising, (vi) gender and socio-economic perspectives. The strategy is articulated around 8 goals that provide a suitable framework for the actions that Cambodia has considered in its effort to mobilize resources for the implementation of its revised NBSAP, which integrate the biodiversity objectives of all the regional and global agreements it has ratified.

There are challenges to resource mobilization. However, Cambodia has already gained valuable experience with resource mobilization for the 2002 NBSAP. The following are some of the opportunities for future mobilization of financial resources:

(a) Cambodia adopted policies, strategies and roadmaps that are favorable to the mobilization of resources for activities that support and lead to sustainable development and poverty eradication. For example, the Green Growth Roadmap developed by the Ministry of Environment (MOE) in 2009 is a supporting framework for environmentally sustainable and socially inclusive development and growth in Cambodia. This roadmap creates the basis for environmentally sound economic development through promotion of sustainable consumption and production, green business and greening the market, development of sustainable infrastructure, green tax and budget reform. The priority sectors identified in the strategy include agriculture, infrastructure, urban development, employment and the development of human resources. The roadmap also aims to align all relevant Ministries, institutions, NGOs, international organizations, development partners and academia to cooperate in addressing current challenges to sustainable development;

(b) As part of the effort to increase resources for the implementation of CBD, a national capacity self-assessment (NCSA) accompanying an action plan for national capacity development regarding implementation of the 3 Rio Conventions was developed and adopted by the government in 2007. The Prime Minister63 made a call to those who care about biodiversity, land quality, climate change adaptation and mitigation, and poverty reduction to support the National Capacity Self-Assessment (NCSA) Action Plan and push for a long term plan;

(c) There are major bilateral donors including Australia, Canada, China, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States. However, as stated in the 5th National Report, a large part of the funds provided through bilateral agreement are used by NGOs or businesses from the respective donor country;

(d) Various international NGOs are active in the region; to name a few: the Mekong River Commission (MRC), the World Fish Center and the ASEAN Regional Centre for Biodiversity Conservation (ARCBC);

(e) Major multilateral donors include the United Nations (particularly UNDP), the European Union, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the International Monetary Fund;

(f) The Hollywood movie star, Angelina Jolie, has donated USD 10 million towards the biodiversity conservation project at Roneam Daun Sam and Samlaut Protected Areas;

(g) Entry fees collected from visitors‟ access to Biosphere Reserves and National Parks, as well as income from forest concession, fishery concession and fishing taxes will be placed in the national coffers and returned as annual budget allocation for the management of the respective areas.

2.

Issues

In Cambodia, the main issues regarding the resources needed for the implementation of the updated NBSAP are as follows:

(a) Limited Government budget;

(b) Low technology and lack of equipment;

(c) Limited human resources; and

(d) Language barrier.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1: Enhance human resource development and engagement in biodiversity conservation and sustainable use;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Make operational at the national level the Biodiversity Resource Mobilization Strategy adopted under the Convention on Biological Diversity;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Strengthen the national technology capacity;

(d) Strategic objective 4: Strengthen and enhance coordination of national institutions dealing with biodiversity issues.

Resource mobilization and capacity building are critical elements of the "enabling" cluster and as such constitute a key component in almost every project.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

129

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "R

esource M

Strategic Objectives

1.1. B uilding on previous national capacity assessm ents, assess the know ledge, skills and corresponding hum an resources required to im plem ent this N B SA P. 1.2. O rganize consultation w orkshops to m onitor and carry out a valuation of staff, and describe the roles and responsibilities of M inistries, their departm ents/agencies and other stakeholders currently involved in the key actions under the various them es of this Strategy. 1.3. D evelop and im plem ent a hum an resource strategic plan, bearing in m ind the current capability of existing educational and training establishm ents, and taking into account the short term as w ell as long term needs for im plem enting the actions identified in this N B SA P, the possibility of synergy am ong the strategic them es, and the possibility of South-South and N orth-South cooperation that exist to fill certain gaps in skills and expertise. 1.4. D evelop a technology system for hum an resource m anagem ent. 1.5. Prom ote budgetary allocations in national and relevant sectoral budgets for hum an capacity building. 2.1 Start assessing financial needs by calculating the full cost of im plem enting each of the actions planned in the revised N B SA P, including an assessm ent of the ecological, genetic, socioeconom ic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of the im portant com ponents of biological diversity. 2.2 Identify institutions across m ultiple sectors and describe their specific role in financing the actions planned in the N B SA P. 2.3 U ndertake a reform of econom ic incentives that w ill prom ote the private/business sector engagem ent in conservation efforts. Key Actions

Coopamibjective 1: uman resource development and t in biodiversity conservation and e use.

M O E

M A F

M O E

M O E

M O EM O E

M O E

M O EM O Pbjective 2: ational at the national level the ty Resource M

obilization Strategy adopted Convention on Biological Diversity.

M O EM EF

M O EM EF

M O EM EF

National Biodiversity Strategy and

130

2.5 D evelop and im plem ent a resource m obilization strategy through the follow ing actions: 2.5.1 identify, screen and prioritize potential finance actors and biodiversity finance m echanism s; and assess how m uch funds each source can generate 2.5.2 integrate considerations on biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services into national priorities and developm ent plans by 2015, and thereby have the appropriate dom estic financial provisions for biodiversity m ade in the budgets of those plans 2.5.3 develop an operational plan w ith the necessary steps and tim efram es 2.5.4 identify robust baselines if targets have to be determ ined in the strategy 2.5.5 M obilize dom estic financial resources from all sources, including, inter alia, the public sector, the private sector, and through new and innovative financial m echanism s, to significantly reduce the gap betw een identified needs and available resources at dom estic level, for effectively im plem enting by 2020 the Strategic Plan for B iodiversity 2011-2020. 2.5.6 Innovative m echanism s that can be explored and used include, but are not lim ited to, the reduction or redirection of environm entally-harm ful subsidies, notably those related to intensive agriculture; application of policy options for im proved stew ardship of the country‟s natural capital, such as paym ents for ecosystem services, environm ental fiscal reform , investm ents in ecological infrastructure, biodiversity offset m echanism s; access and benefit-sharing initiatives; environm ental fiscal reform s including innovative taxation m odels and fiscal incentives for achieving the three objectives of the C onvention; m arkets for green products; business-biodiversity partnerships and m obilization of international private sector contributions to biodiversity conservation through initiatives such as R ED D + , the G reen D evelopm ent M echanism (G D M ) initiative, Earth Fund initiative; new form s of charity; and som e new funds under the U N FC C C such as the A daptation Fund (the Least D eveloped C ountries Fund (LD C F) and the Special C lim ate C hange Fund (SC C F)), 2.5.7 Establish the trust funds planned under the Environm ent Law, the Protected A reas Law, the Law on Forestry and the like. 2.4 C ollect inform ation from relevant actors/investors/donors (including G EF) on budgets and expenditures for the actions identified under each of the them es in the revised N B SA P, if possible across several years so as to gain a baseline overview of expenditures by institution and by key action.

M O E,

M A FF

M O E,

M A FF

National Biodiversity Strategy an

131

4.2 Identify and im plem ent w ays and m eans to strengthen com plem entarity and synergy am ong these institutions. 4.1 Inventory the institutions dealing w ith biodiversity at the local and national levels, including for research, education and other types of training (universities and specialized centers), inform ation storage and dissem ination (e.g., C H M , B C H ), policy developm ent and im plem entation, legislation and law enforcem ent, planning, designing, m onitoring and environm ental im pact assessm ent. 2.6 D evelop and im plem ent w ays and m eans to reduce the econom ic costs of biodiversity loss, including by addressing the drivers of biodiversity loss. 2.7 Ensure coordination am ong funding partners at the national, regional and international levels for efficiency and to avoid unnecessary duplication. 2.8 B uild the hum an capacity to carry out these activities and raise aw areness in support of resource m obilization, including strengthening capacities of relevant m inistries and agencies to m ake the case for including biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services in discussions w ith donors and relevant financial institutions; prom ote budgetary allocations for biological diversity and its associated ecosystem services in national and relevant sectoral budgets. 3.1 C arry out a technology needs assessm ent for the im plem entation of this N B SA P and assess the potential benefits, costs and risks of the identified technologies, w ith a view to ensuring that acquired technologies are econom ically viable, socially acceptable and environm entally friendly. 3.2 C reate an enabling environm ent, including policies, hum an capacities, research institutions, cooperation/netw orking and budgets, for technology developm ent, acquisition and adaptation, building on actions for im plem enting A rticles 16 to 19 as w ell as the related provisions of the C B D . 3.3 D evelop, acquire and adapt technologies that are relevant to the conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of its com ponents, and that do not cause undesirable dam age to the environm ent, building on ongoing initiatives and program m es, for instance, under other conventions and international agreem ents, w ith a view to m axim izing synergies and avoiding unnecessary duplication.

M O E

M A F

M O E

M A F

M O E

M A F objective 3: n the national technology capacity.

M O E

M A F

M O E

M A F

M O E

M A F objective 4: n and enhance coordination of national ns dealing with biodiversity issues.

M O E

M A FM O P

M O E

M A FM O P

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, a number of pilot projects were underway applying community-based natural resource management (CBNRM) principles to forestry and fisheries in different regions of the country. In 2001, for example, the Government undertook a fishery reform policy whereby some 500,000ha of prime commercial fishing grounds were turned over to local communities for their management. The success of these projects demonstrated that CBNRM is indeed an extremely valuable option to address problems of rural poverty and biodiversity conservation and sustainable use. As a result, the government decided to expand the CBNRM approach beyond fisheries and forestry into other sectors including land-use planning, wildlife management, protected areas, tourism and agriculture. In protected areas and protected forests, due to the limited number of rangers and the importance of the protected resources to local livelihoods, the Government increasingly engaged community groups in the protection and sustainable management of protected areas and protected forest resources. Various biodiversity conservation measures, in particular for adaptation to climate change, are to be implemented at the community level for success and cost-effectiveness.

Community participation implies the regular involvement of members of the community (that is, local authorities, women, youth, elders, communal and religious leaders, members of the indigenous ethnic minority groups, non-governmental organizations and the private sector) in natural resources planning, decision taking and policy-making, implementation, monitoring and reporting processes through multi-stakeholder consultations.

In order to ensure the success of CBNRM, support must be provided to building environmental awareness, understanding and empowerment, particularly in rural communities, and to helping people organize their communities. Legal and institutional frameworks are needed to support and enforce the communities' rights to use and protect their resources. Incentives and financial resources are also usually needed.

Knowing this, the NBSAP focused on addressing the following: (i) insufficient participation and involvement of the population and the private sector in biodiversity resource protection and management; (ii) lack of trained staff and of government capacity to undertake CBNRM; and (iii) limited financial support for CBNRM.

More specifically, the 2002 NBSAP targeted:

(a) The development of community-based natural resource management programs for forestry, fisheries, land-use, protected areas, wildlife in particular threatened species protection, ex situ conservation, wildlife management, and agriculture; and

(b) Implementation of legal, economic and other incentive measures promoting the contribution and participation of the different stakeholders to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, including through strengthening institutional training in community-based natural resource management.

After the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, Cambodia embarked on the process of decentralization and democratization, including the establishment of elected Commune Councils in early 2002. Active community groups were identified and supported to improve their capacity to interact with the Commune Councils, while at the same time seeking ways for the Commune Councils to support the different groups. The Ministry of Rural Development (MRD) undertook a programme for the development of indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities in order to enhance the quality of life of their members, as well as maintain their traditional culture, customs and beliefs.

Building on the decentralization and democratization processes set forth in the 2004 Rectangular Strategy, both MOE and MAFF have been promoting and encouraging the participation of local community members and ethnic minority groups in meetings, seminars and workshops to provide ideas and comments on the management of natural resources. MOE and MAFF developed the necessary guidelines and encouraged the local people living in and around the protected areas and protected forests to create community protected areas (CPA) and community forestry (CF). The number of CPAs created by and under MOE increased from 3 CPAs in 1999 to 120 CPAs in 2013. The number of CFs under management of FA/ MAFF is 453. The Community Fisheries Network, the Community based Eco- tourism Network, and the Network of Participatory Land-use planning were also established64. Comanagement with the full participative involvement of local people throughout the process, from planning through to the monitoring of achievements, has become a fundamental principle in the implementation of strategies relating to biodiversity conservation and sustainable development. This principle is included in various strategies adopted by Cambodia such as the Strategic Planning framework for fisheries, the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023, the eco-village65 concept, and the Green Growth Roadmap.

However, capacity-building and financial support for CBNRM are limited. These limitations have slowed down the development of community-based programmes. Also there is no data on the development of the community based wildlife protection programmes.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Insufficient participation and involvement of the population and private sector to biodiversity resource protection and management.

(b) Lack of trained staff and of government capacity to undertake CBNRM.

(c) Lack of financial support for CBNRM.

3.

Strategic objective

The following strategic objective was adopted to address the identified issues:

Strategic objective 1: Enhance effective and efficient community participation in natural resource

management.

The success in implementing conservation and the sustainable use of biological resources and ecosystem services under the themes in Thematic Groups 1 and 2 and in implementing the CBD Articles 8(j), 10(c) and related provisions will require the effective participation of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities who depend directly on biodiversity. Within the CBD and other biodiversity-related conventions, indigenous and local communities have been acknowledged as being key partners in achieving the goals of these treaties, and their knowledge, innovations and customary sustainable use practices as being essential for efficient, sustainable and economic ecosystem management, also for the conservation of biodiversity including genetic diversity. In addition, resource mobilization; awareness - raising and education; coordination of work for landscape and seascape management; respect of traditional knowledge, know-how and practices; the provision of the Nagoya Protocol; and knowledge sharing and information exchange will all support the participation of communities in the implementation of this NBSAP. The full and effective participation of indigenous ethnic minorities and local communities, at all relevant levels of the integration of traditional knowledge in the implementation of the Convention and this NBSAP is part of the Cambodia Biodiversity Target 17.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

134

Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "C om m unity

Strategic Objectives

1.1. D ocum ent the effectiveness of com m unity participation, and assess the level of socioeconom ic benefits gained by village developm ent com m ittee (V D C ) com m unity m em bers from their participation in natural resource m anagem ent, and develop guidelines building on best practices. 1.2. Strengthen institutional training in com m unity-based natural resource m anagem ent, in particular for sustainable forest m anagem ent, sustainable agriculture and anim al production, sustainable fisheries and aquaculture, sustainable protected area system m anagem ent and tourism , sustainable energy biom ass production, and w ater resources m anagem ent. 1.3. D evelop com m unity based w ildlife protection program s. 1.4. D evelop com m unity based forestry program s. 1.5. D evelop com m unity based agriculture program s. 1.6. D evelop com m unity based fisheries and aquaculture program s. 1.7. D evelop com m unity based land-use and rural developm ent program s. 1.8. D evelop com m unity based protected areas and conservation areas. 1.9. D evelop com m unity based ecotourism . 1.10 D evelop com m unity based production and utilization of biom ass for energy Key Actions

Coordinating an

ministries a objective1:  effective and efficient community tion in natural resource management.

M A FF, M

O E, M

R

M O W A , M

O P

M A FF, M

O E, M

R

M O W A , M

O P

M A FF, M

O E, M

R

M A FF, M

R D , M

O

M A FF, M

R D and

M A FF, M

R D , M

O

M LM

U PC , M

R D M O E, M

A FF and

M O E, M

A FF

M O E, M

A FF M

O

M O E, M

A FF M

M

As stated in the country‟s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), education is a crucial factor in human development. It contributes in myriad ways to poverty reduction, including by providing awareness to better make use of opportunities for economic progress. This sector is therefore accorded high-priority in RGC's development agenda. Increasing public awareness and an understanding of the importance of biodiversity is an essential element in guaranteeing the effectiveness of measures to achieve the conservation and sustainable use of the natural capital sustaining life and human well-being in Cambodia. In order to be efficient, awareness and education activities have to be supported by adequate scientific research and documentation. For efficiency and enhanced synergy, and in the framework of the ecosystem approach or similar approaches, the research being carried out by various bodies within the government, knowledge institutions and non-governmental organizations need some coordination.

Environmental education in Cambodia had a relatively short history at the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP. The most notable government activities of relevance began with the establishment of the Ministry of Environment (MOE) and the Inter-ministerial Steering Committee for Environmental Education (IMSCEE) in 1993. Activities directly or indirectly related to biodiversity included training seminars and capacity building workshops, production of manuals on environmental education for primary school teachers, TV spots, posters, and conducting a national environment day. A department of environmental sciences was opened at the Royal University of Phnom Penh in 2001 to undertake research on environmental issues. Ministries and other institutions also had opportunities to undertake research on biological resources. It was the government‟s intention to better coordinate the development of such research activities between ministries and university departments.

Despite its short history, environmental education received both technical and financial assistance from the United Nations and other international organizations. In addition to the initiatives in the formal education sector, different ministries, international organizations, international and local NGOs were also carrying out environmental activities in the non-formal education sector to promote community-based environmental learning and activities or using educational tools to promote better forestry and agricultural practices. The geographical scope of these activities, however, was limited. There was a need to expand these activities to cover the whole country and reach everyone, especially local communities living in high biodiversity areas and areas that hosted threatened species. In ministries, training activities were mainly needed at the technical and managerial level in forestry, agriculture, fisheries, wildlife and protected area management.

The focus of the 2002 NBSAP was therefore on the (i) shortage of manpower and expertise in the field of biodiversity and sustainable resource management, to be addressed through training programmes on environment conservation and management of natural resources; (ii) weak integration of biodiversity and, in general, environmental concepts in educational curricula and materials; (iii) insufficient awareness and understanding of biodiversity issues and related laws, particularly among local communities who required translated educational and awareness materials into Khmer; (iv) weak national research activities, particularly at the Royal University of Phnom Penh, mainly due to limited financial resources and the lack of technical training for Government staff in biodiversity management. A National Biodiversity Research, Training, Information Center and Library was identified as a solution among others.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP:

Regarding awareness-raising:

(a) The Ministry of Environment is carrying out an awareness programme on biodiversity, climate change, and biosafety66; the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries regularly conduct debates on animal production, fisheries and forestry protection. The Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of Rural Development, the Ministry of Interior, provincial authorities and various NGOs are implementing several awareness and training programmes on biodiversity conservation at different locations. Due to limited human and financial resources, the last large scale national environmental education and awareness campaign was organized in 2005 as part of the GEF supported Tonle Sap Environmental Management Project (TSEMP);

(b) National Biodiversity Day, International Wetland Day, World Water Day, National Fish Day and National Tree Planting Day are celebrated annually throughout the country to enhance awareness.

Regarding education

(a) Building on the Royal Government‟s 2003-2015 "Education for All" Plan, MOEYS is integrating environmental issues, especially biodiversity and ecology, into national school curriculum. The objective is to upgrade knowledge and skills, and to change student behavior regarding biodiversity conservation and sustainable use, while demonstrating its value to human health, agriculture (e.g. home garden, rice cultivation, string bean growing, organic vegetables, mushroom farm, fish, frog and chicken raising), forestry (timber and non-timber forest products), water resources, tourism and sustainable development. The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the UNDP are particularly active in assisting Cambodia in incorporating an environmental education programme into primary and secondary school curricula. A range of train-the-trainer materials on environmental topics have been developed and used; many training materials have also been developed in Khmer. (b) The government has also substantially increased the budget for the education sector and achieved remarkable progress in improving cooperation in education with development partners including NGOs and the private sector.

(c) At least three of the universities in Cambodia, namely the Royal University of Agriculture, the Royal University of Phnom Penh, and Prek Agricultural College, offer courses in life sciences, including biology, fisheries, forestry, animal production, veterinary sciences, land-use, and microbiology. Master‟s degrees in biodiversity conservation and related fields are also available.

(d) Even with limited resources, the Department of Early Education and Care (DEEC) and other organizations have also been conducting a range of formal and informal education activities in the field with local communities and the media. MOE has even developed a new local language website - www.moe.gov.kh. It is considered, however, that without a vision and consistent unifying messages, the effectiveness of these environmental education activities is greatly diminished.

Regarding research development and coordination,

The Government and partner organizations are conducting programmes that include the establishment of three research and development institutes to address issues in the agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors; namely the Cambodian Agricultural Research and Development Institute, the Forest Development and Research Institute, and the Inland Fisheries Development and Research Institute. Moreover, various research centers have been operating particularly for the above three sectors.

It is important to note that there are a lot of awareness-raising, training and research activities under other strategies, plans and programmes of relevance to biodiversity (e.g. under the NFP Strategy notably at the Forest -Wildlife Research and Development Institute (FWRDI), the 2009 National Green Growth Roadmap or the Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 2014-2023) that are not listed here. Work under this theme needs to be well coordinated with these activities for effectiveness, synergy and efficient use of limited resources.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Lack of awareness and understanding of biodiversity issues among local people;

(b) Limited extension services and facilities devoted to environmental awareness;

(c) Limited integration of environmental concepts in educational curricula;

(d) Shortage of manpower and expertise in the field of sustainable resource management;

(e) The infancy of basic research in all fields of natural resources protection and sustainable use;

(f) Lack of funding for environmental education and research;

(g) Lack of environmental training and education materials in Khmer; and

(h) Gaps in the Biodiversity Status Report.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic objective 1:Enhance biodiversity awareness at all levels of society, including through facilitated access to relevant information; also strengthen existing channels and create new ones that will facilitate targeted awareness programmes aimed at key audiences such as rural communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, community elders, the private sector, staff in relevant Ministries and at provincial level, parliamentarians, women, the youth and media;

(b) Strategic objective 2: Strengthen education and training programmes on biodiversity and related issues so as to achieve a critical mass of educated, skilled, talented, capable people for the implementation of this NBSAP and related strategies and plans;

(c) Strategic objective 3: Support biological, ecological and socioeconomic research in the fields of plants, animals and microorganisms from terrestrial, marine and other aquatic habitats, and the ecosystems of which they are a part, and ensure adequate coordination of this research so as to take full advantage of complementarities and synergies.

These strategic objectives and the key actions identified below will enable Cambodia to implement Article 12 and 13 of the Convention on Biological Diversity, the relevant decisions taken by the CBD Conference of the Parties under Communication, Education and Public Awareness (CEPA) and regarding capacity building for the implementation of the Convention, the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the actions under all the themes of this NBSAP. Progress on activities carried out to achieve this Target will facilitate the delivery of other targets associated with the NBSAP. Likewise, if other targets are achieved such as Cambodia target 3 (on the integration of biodiversity values into national and subnational development and poverty reduction strategies and planning processes), target 17 (on traditional knowledge), target 19 (on the establishment of an interoperable and user-friendly information system) and target 2 (on resource mobilization), they will likely facilitate awareness-raising of biodiversity.

National Biodiversity Strategy and

138

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "A

w areness, E search Coordination and D

evelopm

ent"

Strategic Objectives

1.1 U ndertake a survey of people‟s aw areness of biodiversity so as to develop baseline inform ation on aw areness. 1.2 D evelop and im plem ent a C om m unication, Education and Public A w areness (C EPA ) strategy for B iodiversity, building on the C EPA strategy of the C B D , specifying the target audiences (w hose aw areness should be raised), the types of activities (how aw areness should be raised), and the scale of the activity (by how m uch aw areness should be raised). 1.3 Strengthen biodiversity aw areness program m es (including m ass m edia cam paigns, biodiversity w eb site, national biodiversity day, high-level events, publications, posters, TV and radio spots and docum entaries, w orkshops, as m uch as possible targeted to specific groups/sectors, in collaboration w ith national N G O s and universities) and ensure coordination w ith sim ilar aw areness-raising activities being undertaken under other relevant strategies, plans and program m es for effectiveness, synergy and efficient use of lim ited resources. 1.4 Establish a N ational B iodiversity R esearch, D issem inate, Training and Inform ation C enter and Library. 1.5 Further develop the B iodiversity Status R eport by collecting taxonom ic data in all the groups of biodiversity com ponents, as w ell as in all the representative areas of C am bodia, and develop the capacity needed for these activities. 2.1. M ainstream environm ental and biodiversity issues into the curricula at all levels of education, not only under biological sciences but also under other natural sciences such as physics and chem istry, and under hum an sciences in particular social sciences and econom ics, and ensure coordination w ith sim ilar training and education activities being undertaken under other relevant strategies, plans and Key Actions

Coorpamin

ajective 1: diversity awareness at all levels of society rough facilitated access to relevant ; also strengthen existing channels and nes that will facilitate targeted awareness  aimed at key audiences such as rural and indigenous ethnic m

inorities, com

m unity ivate sector, staff in relevant M

inistries and at el, parliam

entarians, w

om

en, the youth and

M O E, G

M O E, G M A FF, M LM

U P

M C R an

M O E,G M A FF, M LM

U P

M C R an

M O E, G

M O E, G and M

O jective 2: ducation and training programmes on and related issues so as to achieve a critical

ated, skilled, talented, capable people for

IM SC EEM O E,G

National Biodiversity Strategy and

139

ntation of this NBSAP and related d plans

program

m es for effectiveness, synergy and efficient use of lim

ited resources 2.2. Strengthen capacity of G

overnm

ent staff and staff from

any relevant agencies in biodiversity conservation, sustainable use and m

anagem

ent

M O E, G

M A FF 2.3. Set up training program

s on the m

anagem

ent and conservation of natural resources, targeting m

em bers of com

m unities w

ho depend directly on biodiversity as a priority.

M A FF,M

M O EY

Sjective 3: ogical, ecological and socioeconomic he fields of plants, animals and sms from terrestrial, marine and other tats, and the ecosystems of which they are nsure adequate coordination of this s to take full advantage of arities and synergies

3.1. D

evelop and coordinate biodiversity research program

s for efficiency in the country, and m

ore specifically at the R

oyal U

niversity of Phnom

Penh, ensuring coordination w

ith research activities being undertaken under other relevant strategies, plans and program

m es for effectiveness, synergy and efficient use of lim

ited resources including: the N

FP strategy, the 2009 N

ational G

reen G

row

th

R oadm

ap or the C

am bodia C

lim

ate C

hange Strategic Plan 2014-2023

R U PP, R

At the time of the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the legal coverage of biodiversity related issues was inadequate and poorly enforced, and the public was not much aware of the legislation related to the environment. As such, the existing legislation concerning biodiversity was under revision, with by-laws and regulations related to the 1996 Law on Environmental Protection and Natural Resource Management being prepared, for example.

Thus, the 2002 NBSAP focused on the following strategic objectives and actions

(a) Adoption of legislation, bylaws and regulations related to biodiversity issues, such as protected areas, endangered species, biosafety, water protection, pesticide control, property rights, community-based natural resource management, and land-use planning; clarification of ministerial jurisdiction and overlap prevention; and national campaign for raising awareness of environmental legislation;

(b) Law enforcement through adequate incentive measure;

(c) Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment guidelines and institutional capacity building for applying EIA;

(d) Implementation of regional and international biodiversity obligations from MEA;

(e) Provision of support to the Biodiversity Steering committee and Secretariat with the mandate of coordinating NBSAP implementation.

Since the adoption of the 2002 NBSAP,

(a) Cambodia has passed many new laws including the Forestry Law (2002), Land Law (2003), Fisheries Law (2006), Water Resource Management Law (2007), Protected Areas Law (2008), Biosafety Law (2008), Law on Crop Seed Management and Rights of Plant Breeders (2008) and related regulations67, however there is still limited implementation and enforcement;

(b) Cambodia ratified a number of international and regional agreements that are being implemented at a relatively slow pace due to limited financial resources. There is a strong need for synergies in the implementation of these commitments to guarantee complementary and mutual reinforcement. Stronger synergies at the national level will minimize the unnecessary duplication of efforts, it will avoid contradictions and make for a more efficient use of the available resources.

(c) The roles and responsibilities of key ministries have been clarified but some roles still overlap;

(d) Public awareness on legislation has been improved;

(e) After EIA law was promulgated, a series of capacity building activities had been organized to strengthen institution, however more training is still needed.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Inadequate management standards in the different activity sectors

(b) Overlap, fragmentation and inadequate co-ordination between authorities responsible for the protection, conservation and management of resources

(c) Inadequate legal coverage of biodiversity related issues

(d) Lack of public awareness on legislations related to the environment

(e) There is a need to strengthen existing institutions and mechanisms that will ensure effective law enforcement.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues: (a) Strategic objective 1: Promote an effective and coherent implementation of policies and legislations relating to biodiversity.

(b) Strategic objective 2: Strengthen existing national and regional institutions addressing biodiversity issues.

The long-term conservation, sustainable use and management of biological resources and ecosystems (see themes under Groups 1 and 2) require stable institutions and legal and policy frameworks that are supported by monitoring, as well as extension, awareness-raising, capacity-building, and sustainable financing programmes (Group 3 themes).

National Biodiversity Strategy and

142

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem entation under the them

e on "L egislation aucture"

Strategic Objectives

1.1 C om pile legislations, strategies, plans and program m es relating to biodiversity, and develop "T em atea 68 like" issue-based m odules that w ill facilitate coherent and coordinated actions and im plem entation at the national and regional levels, and that w ill reinforce cross-sectoral understanding and cooperation. 1.2 D evelop or, as appropriate, am end by-law s and regulations on biodiversity related issues in order to m eet new ly identified threats to biodiversity, such as biosafety, species at risk, intellectual property rights, and clarify m inisterial roles and responsibilities. 1.3 Im plem ent an institutional capacity-building project on Environm ental Im pact A ssessm ent. 1.4 U ndertake national aw areness cam paigns on environm ental legislation. 2.1 Support institutional structures (such as C H M and B C H ) at the national level, and establish and strengthen sim ilar structures at the regional (in particular in the context of the A greem ent on the C ooperation for the Sustainable D evelopm ent of the M ekong R iver B asin) and global levels to facilitate im plem entation of the C B D and biodiversity-related conventions in a participatory and coherent w ay, building on the ecosystem approach. 2.2 Establish and support institutions relating to the im plem entation of the N agoya Protocol, and the acquisition and adaptation of technology of relevance to biodiversity conservation and sustainable use. 2.3 Strengthen the N ational C ouncil for Sustainable D evelopm ent and other interm inisterial structures established through the various law s and policies that govern the conservation and sustainable use of biological resources and ecosystem s. Key Actions

Coorpamin

ajective 1: effective and coherent implementation of legislations relating to biodiversity.

M O E, G and M

O

M O E, G and M

O

M O E

M O E jective 2: xisting national and regional institutions iodiversity issues.

M O E, G

M O E, G

M O E,G

Poverty reduction is the foremost priority of the Government of Cambodia. As stated in the 2010 Cambodia Millennium Development Goals (CMDG) report, Cambodia reduced poverty by about 17 percentage points over a period of 13 years. Over the three-year period from 2004 to 2007, poverty was reduced from 35% to 30%, at a rate of about 1.2% per year (with an average growth in GDP of 11% per year over this period). Over this period, the Cambodian economy has experienced a profound structural transformation including its integration into the global economy and a shift of jobs from agriculture to manufacturing. Economic growth over the past decade had been driven mostly by the garment, agriculture, tourism, and construction industries, with the garment industry constituting about 65% of exports.

The National Poverty Reduction Strategy: 2003-2005, the National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2006-2010 and its 2009-2013 Update, which is also the country‟s latest poverty reduction strategy and the roadmap for achieving the CMDG, note that the achievement of poverty reduction is only possible with political and social stability, rule of law, critical reforms in public administration, infrastructure development, and balanced and equitable macro-economic growth, as planned in the Rectangular Strategy for Growth, Employment, Equity and Efficiency in Cambodia. As a result, in the past two decades, Cambodia has been addressing poverty reduction and the improvement of quality of life both at the policy and macro-economic levels, and at the level of direct interventions focused on the poorest populations.

While poverty has decreased substantially over the past 13 years, a third of the population still lives below the poverty line. The average rate of rural poverty is 35%, surpassing the 1% rate of Phnom Penh and the 22% rate of "other urban" areas. These inequalities are due to the high rates of growth largely centered on urban activities in recent years. A major challenge of the NSDP is therefore to adopt strategies and actions that accelerate poverty reduction in rural areas. Such strategies are typically developed as social and economic responses to poverty; however they need to be developed differently, taking into account environmental considerations including biodiversity, in the same way that environmental (biodiversity) management needs to take into consideration social and economic aspects in order to support poverty reduction and sustainable development.

Under this theme, we consider only the role of biodiversity, including ecosystem services and their management (conservation and use) in poverty reduction and in improving the quality of life. Biodiversity can be considered as the totality of genes, species, and ecosystems of a region and it thereby includes all the genetic resources, microorganisms, and plant and animal species, and ecosystems that are providing the goods and services that are critical to our well-being.

The 2005 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment as well as the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) provide conceptual frameworks linking biodiversity and its associated services to human well-being and poverty reduction69. Human well-being consists of having multiple components, including basic materials for a good life (such as adequate livelihoods, sufficient nutritious food, shelter, and access to goods), freedom of choice and action (expressed as the opportunity to be able to achieve what an individual values doing and being), health (including access to clean air and water), good social relations (including social cohesion, mutual respect and the ability to help others), and security (personal safety, access to secure resources and security from disasters). Poverty is also multidimensional and has been defined as the pronounced deprivation of well-being. Ecosystems are essential for human well-being for their role as provisioning (the products people obtain from ecosystems, such as food, fuel, fiber, fresh water, and genetic resources), regulating (the benefits people obtain from the regulation of ecosystem processes, including air quality maintenance, climate regulation, erosion control, regulation of human diseases, and water purification), cultural (the nonmaterial benefits people obtain from ecosystems through spiritual enrichment, cognitive development, reflection, recreation, and aesthetic experiences), and supporting (services that are necessary for the production of all other ecosystem services, such as primary production, production of oxygen, and soil formation) services.

The management of ecosystems and, in general, of biodiversity will influence how biodiversity and its ecosystem services will affect the well-being of Cambodians. The performance of Cambodia under all the themes of the NBSAP will determine how biodiversity will contribute to poverty reduction and quality of life in Cambodia in the coming years. It will be necessary to particularly take into account how the benefits from economic growth will be shared between urban and rural areas.

In Cambodia, an overwhelming majority of the population depends upon agriculture, fishery and forestry as major sources of livelihood, with most local farmers relying upon subsistence farming and foraging. The average rural household obtains food and generates income through a combination of activities such as farming, hunting, fishing and the gathering of wood and non-forest products. Other supplemental sources of livelihood include livestock raising; primary processing of agricultural, forestry and fishery products; odd jobs and vending. Despite the continuous efforts of the Government to conserve and protect the environment and the natural resource base, there are serious cases of resource depletion and degradation. In the past thirty years, intensive logging and the illegal extraction of timber have led to a drastic reduction in forest cover, from about 90% forest cover to less than 50% of the land base. In turn, these intensive rates of deforestation have created land erosion problems and a higher incidence of flooding, leading to the loss in fertile soils and crops. In the agricultural sector, the inappropriate use of pesticides is leading to the contamination of waters and fish habitats, and to the degradation of other aquatic resources. The over harvesting of wildlife has led to the near extinction of valuable food sources, including several species of wild animals and plants. The construction of dams and other water management infrastructures is a constant menace to the integrity of fish habitats. Industrial and urban pollution is threatening the quality of life of the human population.

Realizing the full potential of Cambodian agriculture can make a significant contribution to poverty reduction and enhanced quality of life. This will require very large investments in rural infrastructure, agricultural extension and business development services, increased food processing to international standards, increased vocational training in agriculture, an appropriate trade policy and linkages to markets.

At the time of adoption of the 2002 NBSAP, the 1997 Socio-economic Survey of Cambodia indicated that 36% of the population was living below the poverty line. The 2002 NBSAP highlighted the need for better planning and management of biological resources in order to improve living conditions and reduce poverty by addressing the following issues:

(a) Poverty and limited support for alternative livelihoods of rural people

(b) Unsustainable harvesting of key subsistence resources

(c) Degradation of habitats providing staple food and commodities

Therefore in order to reduce poverty (objectives and actions), Cambodia decided to strategically monitor and analyze poverty, and formulate a poverty reduction strategy. Cambodia also undertook:

(a) Community-based capacity-building programs in rural communities; (b) Environmental awareness programs to improve living conditions; (c) To increase family income by providing means to farmers for improving agricultural productivity;

(d) To improve living conditions through medical care, hygiene, clean water and sanitation programs;

(e) To promote opportunity for poor people to access basic education, adult literacy, informal education (number of students in the programs); (f) To promote economic development through infrastructure and micro-credit programs.

The Cambodian government also pays specific attention to the welfare of the indigenous ethnic minorities in Cambodia. The Ministry of Rural Development developed a National Policy on Indigenous Development, including indigenous rights to use the land that indigenous communities occupy. There has been significant growth in community-based natural resource management programs across forestry, fisheries, and protected areas, and also including participatory land-use planning approaches. MLMUPC has also been implementing programmes with relevant ministries to provide awareness to the rural population on the sustainable use of natural resources.

Cambodia‟s present performance in relation to the CMDGs is mixed and uneven. It is likely that Cambodia will not be able to meet all the CMDGs by 2015, unless its national efforts are further strengthened and are supplemented and reinforced through global support. Cambodia‟s progress towards the CMDGs is constrained by many impediments, of which two critical ones are the chronic shortage of investment funds and poor access to international markets, especially markets in developed countries, despite its entry into the WTO.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified: (a) Poverty and limited support for alternative livelihoods for the rural population depending mainly on agriculture, with limited access to and ownership of agricultural land and with limited access to other natural resources such as forest- and fishery-related resources (b) Unsustainable harvesting of key subsistence resources (c) Degradation of habitats providing staple food and commodities (d) High population growth, inadequate opportunities, and high vulnerability of rural communities

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues (a) Strategic objective 1: Enhance the contribution of biodiversity conservation, the sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources to poverty reduction and the Cambodia Millennium/Sustainable Development Goals (b) Strategic objective 2: Strengthen the enabling environment for the implementation of the actions that will enhance the quality of life for all in Cambodia and contribute to poverty reduction.

Actions considered under all the themes of this strategy will contribute to the achievement of poverty reduction and to the maintenance of a high quality of life in Cambodia.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

146

y actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "Q

uality of L duction"

Strategic Objectives

1.1. A ssess the environm ental and socioeconom ic benefits from biodiversity conservation and sustainable use initiatives in all relevant econom ic sectors. 1.2. Support and encourage biodiversity conservation and sustainable use initiatives that yield substantial benefits and thus contribute significantly to im proving quality of life and poverty reduction in C am bodia. 1.3. Prom ote and support com m unity-based natural resource m anagem ent program s in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, protected areas, and land-use, including w om en's capacity building. 1.4. Environm ental aw areness program s in rural areas. 1.5. C arry out poverty m onitoring and analysis program s on a regular basis, using participatory poverty assessm ent. 1.6. Integrate biodiversity perspectives in the im plem entation of the Poverty R eduction Strategy and C am bodia M illennium D evelopm ent goals relating to poverty reduction. 1.7. B earing in m ind that C am bodia‟s poverty is rooted in its large agricultural sector, w hich has low productivity and low grow th but provides livelihood to the vast m ajority of the country‟s population, carry out research to im prove agricultural productivity and dissem inate the best practices to enhance agricultural production and revenues/incom es, as w ell as food security and rural livelihoods. 1.8. Ensure the provision of rural drinking w ater supply services. Key Actions

Comective 1: contribution of biodiversity conservation, the se of its components and the fair and ring of benefits arising from the utilization of

rces to poverty reduction and the Cambodia Sustainable Development Goals

M A

M A

M A M R

M O

M O M R

M O

M O

M O

M O

M O

National Biodiversity Strategy an

147

1.9. Ensure the provision of rural sanitation services.

M O jective 2: the enabling environment for the tion of the actions that will enhance the fe for all in Cambodia and contribute to uction

2.1 M

obilize financial resources for the above-listed actions and strengthen hum

an and institutional capacities, including through com

m unication, education and other types of training, public aw

areness and health services.

M O M R

M O 2.2 D

evelop and im

plem

ent environm

ental aw

areness program

s in rural areas.

M O M R

M O 2.3 Prom

ote the creation of green jobs and provide support based on the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, particularly in the w

ater sector, agriculture, forestry, fisheries, energy and tourism

sectors, as a w

ay to expand job opportunities, im

prove rural livelihoods and reduce vulnerability of local and indigenous com

m unities, in line w

ith the country‟s priority poverty reduction actions;

M O

M A

M L

M O

Theme 23: Landscape and Seascape Management and Coordination

1. Background

In 2000, the world community endorsed the ecosystem approach as the primary framework for the

management of biodiversity70. The ecosystem approach is a strategy for the integrated management of

land, water and living resources that promotes conservation and sustainable use in an equitable way. This

approach, supported by 12 principles, takes into account all the components that are present and

interacting within the ecosystem, as well as the structure, processes, functions and interactions taking

place within the ecosystem. It is important to bear in mind that biodiversity consists of plants, animals,

microorganisms and ecosystems of which they are part, and that „ecosystem' means a dynamic complex

of plant, animal and micro-organism communities and their non-living environment interacting together

as a functional unit.

The activities of all sectors affect biodiversity and can contribute to, or detract from, the conservation of biodiversity, the sustainable use of its components and ecosystem services, and the fair and equitable services from the utilization of genetic resources. Thus, most problems relating to biodiversity management are complex, with many interests from various stakeholders, a wide range of interactions among the ecosystem components, and side-effects and implications, and should therefore involve the necessary expertise and stakeholders at the local, national, regional and international level, as appropriate. Principle 12 of the ecosystem approach provides a framework for fostering greater involvement of all the relevant stakeholders, fostering technical expertise in planning and carrying out coordinated activities, sharing management resources, or simply exchanging information. In addition, in accordance with Principle 1 of the ecosystem approach, different sectors of society view ecosystems in terms of their own economic, cultural and societal needs. Thus the integrated management of land, water and living resources requires increased communication, cooperation and coordination (i) between sectors, including in particular agriculture, fisheries, forestry, garments, tourism, energy, transport and judicial sectors in Cambodia, (ii) at various levels of the Government (national, provincial, local), (iii) among and within ministries, (iv) with civil society and private sector stakeholders, and (v) at the regional and international levels. Procedures and mechanisms should be established to ensure the effective participation of all the relevant stakeholders and actors during the consultation processes, decision making on management goals and actions, and in implementing these goals and actions.

It is also important to bear in mind that ecosystems are open systems and that they are often connected to other ecosystems. This open structure and connectedness of ecosystems ensures that effects on ecosystem functioning are seldom confined to the point of impact or only to one system. Thus in accordance with Principle 3 of the ecosystem approach, the effects of management interventions or of any decisions not to intervene will not be confined solely to the point of impact, they will be felt in adjacent areas, downstream, at great distances linked by migratory species systems, and even well into the future.

Bearing in mind that the ecosystem approach is based upon the hierarchical nature of biological diversity, characterized by the interaction and integration of genes, species and ecosystems, which function at a range of spatial and temporal scales, according to Principle 7 of the ecosystem approach, management will be defined operationally within the boundaries of this nested hierarchy by users, managers, scientists and indigenous and local peoples,. Connectivity between areas should be promoted where necessary. Management processes and institutions should be designed to match the scales of the aspects of the ecosystem being managed. More importantly, perhaps, given that ecosystem components and processes are linked across scales of both space and time, management interventions need to be planned to transcend these scales.

Given that the definition of ecosystem approach does not specify any particular spatial unit or scale, it has been difficult for many to capture the concept in their work on the ground. Therefore, some organizations put forward other approaches in line with the ecosystem approach that are more familiar to people working on the ground, such as the landscape approach.

Landscape71 including seascape comprises the visible features of an area of land, including the physical elements of landforms such as mountains or hills, rivers, lakes, ponds and the sea; and living elements of land cover including indigenous vegetation, different forms of land-uses including agricultural lands, buildings and other structures. Combining both their physical origins and the cultural overlay of human presence, often created over millennia, landscapes reflect the living synthesis of people and place vital to local and national identity. In other words, landscapes and seascapes72 can be described as dynamic mosaics of habitats and land-uses where the interaction between people and nature is necessary for the harmonious maintenance of biodiversity, while providing humans with the goods and services needed for their livelihoods, survival and well-being in a sustainable manner. Landscape and seascape provide a wide range of provisioning, regulating, cultural and supporting services. They also root the identities of indigenous peoples and local communities, who are keepers and managers of biodiversity.

Land constitutes Cambodia‟s most precious resource. Land reform has been vital to enhancing social stability, developing an efficient land market, achieving environmental sustainability, and increasing agricultural productivity. It is agreed that security of land tenure in a transparent and equitable manner allows for proper land management and poverty reduction by giving citizens access to financial markets by using their land titles as collateral. The intrinsic, aesthetic and intangible values of Cambodia‟s biodiversity through its rural landscape, with environmental and natural resources are high. The rural landscape is heavily represented in much of the local artwork from the bas-reliefs of the Angkorian-era to the artists of today. This landscape is also a cornerstone of Khmer proverbs, especially as they relate to the Tonle Sap‟s ecosystem role as the „beating heart‟ of the country.

Thus, a landscape approach73 looks across large, connected geographic areas to more fully recognize natural resource conditions and trends, natural and human influences, and opportunities for resource conservation, restoration, and development. It seeks to identify important ecological values and patterns of environmental change that may not be evident when managing smaller, local land areas. It provides an important foundation for developing coordinated management strategies with partner agencies and stakeholders, and should thus be applied from the planning stage through to monitoring and reporting. The landscape and seascape approach encompasses the concepts of integrated watershed management, river basin management, and coastal area management, which integrate multidisciplinary approaches to the management of biophysical, social, and economic issues affecting water resources and their uses. The widely adopted Integrated Natural Resource Management (INRM) approach, including the Integrated Production and Protection (IPP) crop management, and Integrated Pest Management (IPM), is conceptually defined as "the responsible and broad-based management of the land, water, forest and biological resource base-including genes-needed to sustain agricultural productivity and avert degradation of potential productivity."

At the landscape/seascape level, management of biodiversity will typically require cooperation and collaboration among many line ministries including the Ministry of Environment (MOE), the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (MAFF), the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MOWRM), the Ministry of Mines, and Energy (MME), the Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction (MLMUPC), the Ministry of Rural Development (MRD), the Ministry of Women‟s Affairs (MOWA), the Ministry of Interior (MOI), the Ministry of Health (MOH), the Ministry of Commerce (MOC), the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), Cambodia‟s Chamber of Commerce (CCoC), and the Ministry of Tourism (MOT). As noted in the Green Growth roadmap, environmental and social issues are cross‐cutting and thereby require multi‐sectoral cooperation.

Good governance is essential for the successful application of landscape and seascape management. It

will ensure intersectoral cooperation. Good governance includes sound environmental, resource and

economic policies and administrative institutions that are responsive to the needs of the people. Robust

and sound resource management systems and practices are required to support these policies and

institutions. Decision-making should account for societal choices, be transparent and accountable and

involve society (Based on Ecosystem Approach decision VII/11).

As a member of the International Partnership on the Satoyama Initiative, Cambodia supports the Satoyama Initiative dealing with socioecological production landscapes and seascapes (SEPLS) found in many places in the world under different names and deeply linked to local culture and knowledge.

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified:

(a) Loss of native species;

(b) Habitat fragmentation;

(c) Limited coordination among stakeholders;

(d) Ecosystem approach and its 12 principles are not widely known and applied;

(e) Coordination and cooperation among stakeholders and indigenous and local communities are limited; and

(f) Information about landscapes and seascapes is limited.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objective was adopted to address the identified issues.

Strategic Objective 1: Improve landscape and seascape management and coordination for efficient, enhanced and synergistic conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity components

The implementation of actions relating to „Landscape and Seascape Management and Coordination‟ (Table 27) will benefit from the activities carried out to enhance community participation and participatory approach, supported by legislation and institutional structures such as the National Biodiversity Steering Committee. These actions will also benefit from the CHM that is facilitating technical and scientific cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange and from actions under many other themes, in particular the theme of „Awareness, Education, Research Coordination and Development‟. These actions will also contribute to the design and implementation of protected area systems, adequate management of mining, wise use of biological resources, as well as water resources including in the tourism sector.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

151

Key actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies responsible for their im

plem

entation under the them

e on "L

andscape a

M anagem

ent and C

oordination"

Strategic Objectives

1.1. M ap landscapes/seascapes and characterize their structures, functions and m anagem ent practices used. M apping of landscapes/seascapes includes an assessm ent of their socioeconom ic and cultural values and identification of the m ain stakeholders, as w ell as m aking the inform ation available on the C H M , as appropriate. 1.2. Facilitate the developm ent of partnerships and engagem ent am ong the m ain stakeholders and sectors, and facilitate the full and effective participation of indigenous peoples and local com m unities and other stakeholders including experts. 1.3. M obilize adequate financial resources and technologies needed for assessing and effectively m anaging landscapes/seascapes. 1.4. Prom ote better understanding of the ecosystem approach through program m es of com m unication, education and public aw areness. 1.5. Initiate and facilitate as appropriate capacity-building, technology transfer, and aw areness-raising to assist in landscape/seascape m anagem ent. 1.6. M onitor and review to allow adaptive m anagem ent. 1.7. D evelop the capacity to broker negotiations and trade-offs, and m anage conflicts am ong relevant stakeholder groups in reaching decisions about m anagem ent, use and conservation of biological resources. Key Actions

Coordinparticipating

ageObjective 1: andscape and seascape management ination for efficient, enhanced and c conservation and sustainable use of ty components.

M O E, G

SSD

, M

M O W R A M , M M TC

, M

O T, M

M O E, G

SSD

, M

M O W R A M , M M TC

, M

O T, M

M O E, G

SSD

, M

M O W R A M , M M TC

, M

O T, M

M O E, M

A FF, M

M O W R A M , M M TC

, M

O T, M

M O E, G

SSD

, M

M W R M , M

O EY

M O T, M

LU

P, R

M O E, M

A FF, M

M O EY

S, M

M EM LU

P, R

U PP

M O E, G

SSD

, M

M W R M , M

O EY

M O T, M

LU

P, R

Theme 24: Clearing-House Mechanism for Technical and Scientific Cooperation, Knowledge Sharing and Information Exchange

1. Background

Paragraph 3 of Article 18 of the CBD calls for the establishment of a clearing-house mechanism (CHM), at the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties, to promote and facilitate technical and scientific cooperation. The CHM mission has been further specified, in decision X/15 of the CBD Conference of the Parties, as that of a tool that will significantly facilitate the implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and its Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020. It will do so through effective information services and other appropriate means that promote and facilitate scientific and technical cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange, and by establishing a fully operational network of national clearing-house mechanisms for the effective provision of information services that will facilitate the implementation of the national biodiversity strategies and action plans, and partners.

Cambodia established its CHM in 2011 with the mandate "to provide the efficient exchange of information on biodiversity in Cambodia between involved persons and institutions", and to "facilitate international access to information on the status of biodiversity studies and biodiversity management in Cambodia". Thus the Cambodia CHM contains:

(a) A few publications relating to the Convention on Biological Diversity including the 2002

NBSAP, national reports under the CBD, and a few laws in both English and Khmer on

Environmental Protection and Management of Natural Resources, on Protected Areas,

Fisheries, Forestry, Land, and on the Control of Air Pollution and Noise Disturbances. The

following are available in English-only: the 2007 Law on Water Resources Management,

and the Sub-decree on Environmental Impact Assessment Process;

(b) A frame for lists of events and for activities (not yet operational);

(c) Links (not yet operational) to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Strategic Plan for

Biodiversity 2011-2020, the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, the Nagoya Protocol, The Cartagena

Protocol on Biosafety, the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol;

(d) Biodiversity information about Cambodia consisting of a country profile, ecosystem profile,

species database (to be updated) and national reports; and

(e) Links to the websites of collaborators: only the Asian Center for Biodiversity (ACB) and

Partnerships in Environmental Management for the Seas of East Asia (PEMSEA).

2.

Issues

The following key issues were identified regarding the Clearing-House Mechanism of Cambodia:

(a) Not clearly needs-driven and not updated regularly;

(b) Not structurally decentralized and little structure to promote scientific and technical cooperation;

(c) Limited information stored;

(d) Apparently, no BCH or Nagoya Protocol clearing-house; and

(e) No Khmer language.

3.

Strategic objectives

The following strategic objectives were adopted to address the identified issues

(a) Strategic Objective 1: Improve access to and generation of information;

(b) Strategic Objective 2: Improve the use of information and knowledge; and

(c) Strategic Objective 3: Increase the availability of financial, technical and human resources for the clearing-house mechanism.

National Biodiversity Strategy an

153

ey actions and relevant ministries as well as agencies under the them

e on "C learing-House M

echanism for Technical and Scooperation, K

now ledge Sharing and Inform

ation E xchange"

Strategic Objectives

1.1. D evelop a harm onized inform ation m anagem ent system . 1.2. D evelop a com m on clearing-house m echanism . 1.3. Strengthen existing stakeholder platform s in order to increase stakeholder engagem ent. 1.4. Increase contents to include, in addition to national reports and N B SA Ps, country profiles, biodiversity values, status and trends, as w ell as appropriate legislations, including those regarding the operation and functioning of the C H M such as ow nership of inform ation m ade available, scientific and technological inform ation such as on the m anagem ent of biodiversity, traditional know ledge w ith the prior consent of the holders, financial sources, expertise and hum an resources in general, also inform ation of relevance to B iosafety C learing-H ouse (B C H ) and N agoya Protocol clearing-house. 1.5. Increase the interactivity and interoperability of the C H M . 1.6. Ensure translation in K hm er. 2.1 Pilot innovative tools for decision-m aking using the econom ic valuation of the use of natural resources. 2.2 Strengthen the capacity of existing national im plem enting institutions on negotiation skills. Key Actions

Cbjective 1: cess to and generation of .

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M

M bjective 2: e use of information and knowledge.

M

M

M

M

National Biodiversity Strategy an

154

2.3 D

evelop and dissem

inate a unified reporting process on the im

plem

entation status and com

m on form

at for inform

ation input.

M

M 2.4 D

evelop the C

H M in a w

ay that it serves decision-m

akers at all levels w

ell.

M

M 2.5 Increase the am

ount and nature of data stored in the C

H M and their transform

ation into know

ledge for users.

M

M bjective 3: e availability of financial, technical  resources for the clearing-house

3.1 C

reate and support C

H M nodes in participating institutions.

M

M 3.2 Enhance aw

areness about C

H M and its usefulness for planning and decision-m

aking on biodiversity use and m

anagem

ent.

M G S3.3 B

uild hum

an capacity inter alia through training on inform

ation system

s technologies, including training of local com

m unities and indigenous ethnic m

inorities.

M G SM 3.4 Prom

ote research projects, including inventories and taxonom

ic w

ork, and publications on biodiversity issues.

M G S3.5 A

ssess financial needs and m

obilize the needed funds through various m

eans, internal as w ell as external.

M

M 3.6 Increase the m

ultidisciplinarity of the C

H M steering com

m ittee.

M

M g this strategic objective w

ill:

Support the im

plem entation of the objectives under all the other them

es and the C

am bodia B

iodiversity Targets. The C

learing-H

w ill gather, organize and facilitate the w

ide access and use of data, inform

ation and know

ledge relating to all aspects of biodienabling m

easures; A lso support the achievem

ent of C

am bodia Target 19, through w

hich by 2020, an interoperable and user-friendly inform

ation system and inform

ation on biodiversity values, functions, status and trends, threats, and the consequences of its loss w

ill have to bem

aintained for w

ide sharing am

ong stakeholders.

V.

SUPPORT MECHANISMS FOR IMPLEMENTATION

In order to have an effective, sustained and successful implementation of the NBSAP, there is a need to create a favorable political, legal, administrative and socio economic environment and to strengthen the country‟s human, technological, institutional and financial capacity relating to biodiversity issues. The main overarching frameworks that are laying the groundwork to ensure a successful NBSAP include: the Government‟s Rectangular Strategy (2009-2013), the 2003 Cambodian MDGs and forthcoming sustainable development goals, the National Strategic Development Plan for 2006-2010, the 2009 National Sustainable Development Strategy, the National Environmental Action Plan and the 2009 Green Growth Roadmap. These frameworks include, for example, systems and processes built on decentralization, deconcentration, rule of law, and incentives for performance. They support accountability, transparency, participation, responsiveness, marginalized and disadvantaged societal groups, and encourage investment, coordination across agencies and sectors, as well as capacity building. In addition, in the past decade, Cambodia adopted strategies, plans of action and laws (see Annex 1) of relevance to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and sustainable development.

5.1 Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 2015 - 2020

The NBSAP consists of 498 identified key actions to achieve 78 strategic objectives under 24 themes. The targets were developed by the Technical Working Group prior to the updating of the 2002 NBSAP and were revised during the process of finalization of the updated NBSAP.

While it is necessary to implement all these actions to ensure that, "by 2050, Cambodia‟s biodiversity and its ecosystem services would have been valued, conserved, restored where necessary, wisely used and managed so as to ensure equitable economic prosperity and improved quality of life for all in the country", the management of such a large number of key actions can be problematic. Twenty specific targets, some of which are measurable, were defined to streamline the implementation of the NBSAP. The Cambodia Biodiversity Targets presented in Table 29 should therefore serve as a platform that promotes coherence, coordination, cooperation, co-evolution and synergy, while maximizing resource use and efficiency in implementing the key actions. The set of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets encourages a concerted implementation of actions, many of which have already been adopted as part of strategies and plans for sustainable development and as part of various sectoral plans and programmes. In view of creating synergies and partnerships in the implementation of the NBSAP, the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets will facilitate cooperation and the creation of concrete collaborative programmes and activities among the different Ministries and their Departments, and among different actors (including members of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, representatives of the private sector, or local authorities) within and across sectors, and among organizations at the national, regional and international levels..

5.2 Roles and responsibilities in the implementation of the targets and the NBSAP

In consultation and agreement with all the NBSAP stakeholder groups, MOE will build an institutional framework that will govern partnerships, cooperation, coordination and synergies among partners, with a clear description of their accepted roles, responsibilities and expectations. Existing institutional structures will be identified and strengthened and new ones established, as needed, for the implementation of the NBSAP.

Interministerial Biodiversity Steering Committee and National Secretariat for Biodiversity

As a starting point, MOE will mandate and support the Interministerial Biodiversity Steering Committee (IBSC) and the National Secretariat for Biodiversity (NSB) to:

(a) Guide and coordinate the implementation of the NBSAP, focusing on the Biodiversity Targets, including monitoring, reviewing and reporting as well as providing recommendations for NBSAP revision. The Committee could guide on priorities in the implementation of the targets based on effectiveness of action (i.e. prioritizing actions with immediate impacts on the ground); costs and impact (starting with actions having zero or negative costs, then actions having a relatively low cost but high impact, and finally actions that are expensive to carry out especially if their impact is limited); or multiplying effect (starting with actions that can simultaneously help achieve other targets);

(b) Propose the clarification of ministerial jurisdictions, and of the roles and responsibilities of various institutional actors, ways and means to reduce responsibility overlaps while promoting coordination, collaboration and synergy in an ecosystem approach or landscape / seascape perspective, for the consideration and agreement by partners, including other national committees and inter-ministerial committees established to support strategies and plans of action of relevance to biodiversity;

(c) Clarify the relationships of the NBSAP including the Biodiversity Targets to other strategies and plans and other agreements and propose ways to enhance complementarity and synergy for more efficient use of resources and successful implementation; and

(d) Agree with partners on baselines and common sets of indicators to be used for monitoring and assessing progress in implementation of the Biodiversity Targets and NBSAP in general.

The Steering Committee could be organized in, or recommend the establishment of, subcommittees in charge of guiding, overseeing and sustaining efforts for the achievement of each of the targets.

MOE and a communication and outreach strategy

The MOE and line Ministries have a facilitating and implementing role for the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets and the NBSAP. As the coordinator of the NBSAP, MOE is expected to develop and implement a communication and outreach strategy to raise awareness and preparedness about the NBSAP. A good communication strategy will promote a wide participation and enhance the participation of all groups of stakeholders, including by recognizing their values, the importance of their contribution and the possible synergies and win-win situations in which such participation would result.

The communication strategy will target primarily other Ministries involved in the management of biodiversity components, their departments and administrations, and the interdepartmental and/or interministerial committees established to achieve some inter-agency coordination of activities at the government level in the fields of biodiversity and sustainable development including poverty reduction. These bodies/committees include the National Biodiversity Steering Committee (NBSC), the National Committee for Forest Management Policy, the National Coastal Zone Steering Committee, the Provincial/ Municipal Rural Development Committee and the National Committee for the Conflicts Resolution on Protected Areas Management.

The communication strategy will also aim at bringing on board all the other stakeholder groups, including local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, in addition to the civil society, the business and private sector and knowledge institutions. Participation of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities implies that the value of traditional ecological knowledge is recognized, so that this knowledge is integrated with modern science to promote innovations. A participatory approach is enshrined in the Rectangular Strategy, other national strategies relating to sustainable development, and in the ecosystem approach, which is the primary framework for the implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

As a matter of priority, MOE will endeavor to involve all key players so as to ensure the widest ownership possible of this NBSAP and the Biodiversity Targets, particularly by all relevant authorities, as well as their active participation in implementing the identified actions. Also, as part of the communication strategy, MOE will regularly organize meetings relating to NBSAP and the Biodiversity Targets involving other relevant ministries, government institutions and agencies, local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, as well as civil society, the private sector, knowledge institutions and development partners.

Ministries and their respective Departments

Each ministry will identify actions already described in its policy and programmes of work, against each target and under each of the 24 themes and the overall strategic objectives, and inform about plans for implementation and reporting on progress, and thus how it will contribute to the implementation of the targets and this NBSAP in general.

Partnerships among the Ministries and among their respective Departments will be established for leveraging actions and mainstreaming biodiversity across sectors of government, society and the economy, and to foster synergies for the national implementation of multilateral environmental agreements at the right scale. Partnerships are essential to support the implementation of Cambodia Biodiversity Targets and the NBSAP and should be established with the programmes, funds and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, as well as with other conventions and multilateral and bilateral funding agencies, women‟s and youth‟s groups, local communities, indigenous ethnic minorities and non-governmental organizations. In particular, every effort shall be made to ensure that the achievement of the targets and the implementation of the NBSAP are always in harmony with the implementation of the other international and regional agreements already adopted by Cambodia, including the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES), the World Heritage Convention (WHC), the Man and Biosphere (MAB) programme and the 1995 Agreement on Cooperation for the Sustainable Development of the Mekong River Basin.

A common framework and timetable for reporting will be agreed with partners. While sets of indicators will be agreed upon taking into account the performance indicators listed in Table 29: "Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 2015-2020 and elements for a plan of action for their implementation", baselines will have to be defined as well as milestones for each target, building on ongoing initiatives in the relevant ministries and sectors.

Using the findings from the reporting exercises and actions undertaken to achieve the targets, the NBSAP will be periodically evaluated, revised and improved, as needed, so that they can respond effectively to evolving situations in the future.

MOE will provide the clearing-house mechanism for technical and scientific cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange with additional resources to enhance data mobilization and access to data by, for example as recommended in the 4th Global Biodiversity Outlook, encouraging the use of common informatics standards and protocols, promoting a culture of data sharing, investing in the digitization of natural history collections and promoting citizen scientists‟ contributions to the body of biodiversity observations. National and regional experiences will be regularly compiled in the clearing-house mechanism, such as the successes and failures on all aspects of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use. These compilations may lead to the development of guidelines for biodiversity management or the adaptation of existing ones to the conditions of Cambodia.

As reported in various reports of the Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC), a coordination mechanism for government and donors was developed to increase aid effectiveness. This mechanism needs to be strengthened while ensuring coherence in the actions of all the technical and financial partners.

Provincial and Local Authorities

In order to achieve the targets and implement the NBSAP, many actions will have to be carried out at the local level. The development of local BSAPs and more specific site relevant targets will be encouraged. Provincial and Local Authorities will be encouraged and supported in the development and implementation of local BSAPs and related targets.

5.3 Enabling conditions

Progress towards the achievement of the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets and in general the NBSAP will greatly depend on the conditions facilitating those actions.

Provisions under the themes Group 3 themes and a few other themes in this NBSAP consist of strategies and actions that are meant to enhance and maintain the favorable and enabling conditions for the implementation of the NBSAP and the achievement of the targets. They are Themes 6 (Land-Use Planning), 15 (Access and Benefit-Sharing), 16 (Customary sustainable use and Traditional Knowledge), 17 (Manufacturing Industry, Biotechnology and Biosafety, and Tourism), 18 (Resource mobilization including an incentive system that encourages environmentally responsible behavior), 19 (Community participation), 20 (Awareness, education, research coordination and development), 21 (Legislation and institutional structure), 22 (Quality of life and poverty reduction), 23 (Landscape and seascape management and coordination), and 24 (CHM for technical and scientific cooperation, knowledge sharing and information exchange).

Limited financial resources were found as one of the most critical obstacles to the implementation of the 2002 NBSAP. Resource mobilization is thus essential for operationalizing the updated NBSAP and achieving the associated targets. A diversified source of financing is recommended, including in particular a strong engagement of the business sector.

VI.

MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING

Monitoring and evaluation are critical components of the NBSAP and of the Cambodia Biodiversity Targets. They are useful in reporting on implementation progress, and on the resulting status and trends of biodiversity and their value. Indicators should be defined and used in the process. Monitoring and evaluation also allow for an adaptive management capability to be mainstreamed into the strategy and ensure the flexible nature that characterizes effective and efficient NBSAPs. Periodic assessments and reviews of indicators will serve to inform about performance and whether strategies or actions need to be modified depending upon the findings.

The Technical Working Group proposed a list of indicators for the national biodiversity targets (Table 29). The IBSC can develop a list of additional indicators, including biological, ecological, social and economic indicators as appropriate, for each action adopted in the NBSAP and for each target, building on the lists of indicators existing in the country (e.g. in the 2002 NBSAP, the Agricultural Sector Strategic Development Plan 2006 - 2010 and the PRSP document) and, if needed, in the region and at the global level. There are basically two categories of indicators for monitoring progress in implementing the NBSAP and associated targets. The first category of indicators includes input, process, and output indicators referred to as performance indicators. Such indicators are calculated from data that are routinely collected, maintained and analyzed by the various line ministries and agencies. The second category of indicators includes outcome and impact indicators.

Bearing in mind that the NBSAP and the national biodiversity targets contain actions to be implemented under various sectoral departments and agencies, and by a wide range of stakeholders at various sites or in different landscapes/ecosystems and at different times, in line with the ecosystem or landscape approaches, monitoring and evaluation will require the broad participation of all stakeholder groups and a strong coordination mechanism established to enhance efficiency and avoid unnecessary duplications. Stakeholders typically consist of members of local communities and indigenous ethnic minorities, government institutions and agencies at the national and subnational levels, civil society, the business/private sector, knowledge institutions, development partners and partners from regional agreements. In addition to the wide range of actors who will be implementing the NBSAP, many actions identified in the NBSAP and the associated biodiversity targets will be undertaken as part of the implementation of national development strategies and relevant strategies, plans and programmes under line ministries (in particular MAFF, the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology (MOWRM), or the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME)) other than the MOE, which is coordinating the NBSAP. The Interministerial Biodiversity Steering Committee (IBSC) and the National Secretariat for Biodiversity (serving as the IBSC Secretariat) have been established to coordinate the implementation of the national biodiversity targets and the NBSAP, including monitoring, evaluation and reporting.

While monitoring should be a continuous process so that it can detect unexpected changes and any biodiversity change requiring urgent attention, reporting can be done annually and, necessarily, in response to the obligations already agreed upon by Cambodia, such as national reporting under the MEA or obligations vis a vis a funding agency. Under the CBD, national reports are due every 4 or 5 years, and the next report is likely due for 2018. The National Secretariat for Biodiversity should agree with other stakeholders on a schedule/timetable for collecting information for the national reports, indicators to be used, the responsibilities of individual organizations, and a data validation mechanism.

The clearing-house mechanism should be a suitable tool for collecting such information, while promoting and facilitating technical and scientific cooperation. As a prerequisite, the clearing-house mechanism should be made sufficiently interactive so as to be interoperable with other databases in the country and allow that other stakeholders can access it, input and manage their own data. Complete transparency in the clearing-house mechanism can promote a wide participation in the mechanism and strengthen cooperation. Moreover, the international community and international investors increasingly require transparent and accurate information.

The monitoring and evaluation process should be agreed upon during the NBSAP development phase or during the initial phase of implementation. It requires the establishment and strengthening of relevant institutional and technological capacities, and adequate human and financial resources. The monitoring and evaluating process should be made coherent through the adoption of guidelines applicable throughout the implementation of the NBSAP. Monitoring procedures need to be taken into account and be mainstreamed in the planning process. Biodiversity baselines and targets will be useful in the analysis of the data and information collected. While Cambodia adopted 20 biodiversity targets, there is a need to agree on baselines for these.

The National Biodiversity Steering Committee will have to:

(a) Develop a strategy for obtaining information from the various ministerial departments and NGOs, particularly when the data is not part of the routine collections of those ministerial departments, or when the data is being collected under other multilateral environmental agreements (MEA) or under other strategies and plans that do not correspond exactly to the data needed within the NBSAP;

(b) Develop a strategy for strengthening technical skills among national managerial personnel responsible for collecting and processing; and

(c) Ensure the best coordination between the monitoring processes under the NBSAP and other monitoring activities in the country so that there is no unnecessary duplication of effort, but rather complementarity, synergy and coordination are built into the process.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

161

29: Cambodia Biodiversity Targets 2015-2020 and elements for a plan of action for their implementation

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

1.1. G ather inform ation on the value of biodiversity (at the genetic, species and ecosystem /landscape levels) found in C am bodia; 1.2. G ather m ethods for assessing aw areness and assess the current level of biodiversity aw areness in the country; and thus identify gaps in know ledge and aw areness, and those groups (i.e. priority groups for aw areness-raising program m es) w hose aw areness of biodiversity values is m ost im portant to the status of biodiversity; 1.3. G ather inform ation on (i) m ethods of com m unication, aw areness-raising and education actions, (ii) m essages regarding biodiversity in C am bodia, and (iii) organizations/agencies, involved in com m unication, education and public aw areness identify any gaps; 1.4. G ather all partners to identify and prioritize the types of needed aw areness-raising, com m unication and education actions, and design com m unication, education and other actions to strengthen aw areness of biodiversity values and/or fill the gaps as part of a com m unication, education and public aw areness strategy; 1.5. C arry out the identified actions so as to ensure the integration of biodiversity know ledge in the w ay people deal w ith genetic resources, species and ecosystem s/land- and sea-scapes w hile operating in various sectors (agriculture, m ining, forestry etc.); and 1.6. M ainstream the C EPA strategy on biodiversity into the curricula of all levels of education. Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targets t 1 (Aichi Target 1 74): By 2020, every odian conscious about the environmental, conomic, health, social and cultural value f the services derived from ecosystems, in articular the value of protected area system

s s w

ell as the value of terrestrial and aquatic nim

al and plant resources including anim

al ildlife, livestock, agricultural, forest, reshw

ater and m

arine resources, and the iom

ass used for energy production, and

x

B iodiversity barom

eter: increase inum

ber of people w

ho are consciothe environm

ental, econom

ic, healor cultural value of the services defrom

ecosystem

s, and people w

ho integrating or have integrated this know

ledge in the w

ay they deal w ecosystem

s and biological resourcx

Increase in the num

ber of educatiom edia m

aterials and program

s thatbeen provided to educators and leax

B iodiversity C

EPA

strategy docum developed. x

N ature and num

ber of B

iodiversity

tools developed. x

N um ber of schools w

ith incorporaelem

ents of biodiversity conservatcurricula.

x

N um ber of School Program

s on biodiversity. tegrates this knowledge in the way they eal with these ecosystems and resources. arget is in line with Theme 20 on eness, Education, Research Coordination evelopment. Raising awareness about ersity and its multiple values is considered e of the highest priorities for the mentation of the NBSAP. Activities ered under this target will contribute to the vement of most, if not all, of the other s. In addition, many actions planned under her strategic themes (in particular Theme  clearing-house mechanism and information nge, and the themes in Group 1 on the ction of Biodiversity and Group 2 on inable use of Biodiversity) will contribute to plementation of this target in more specific s or situations.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

162

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

2.1 D evelop, follow ing the guidance in C B D C O P decision X /3 on resource m obilization, a fram ew ork and guidelines for reporting on biodiversity related expenditures; 2.2 Estim ate past and current budget allocation for biodiversity conservation and sustainable use and the m ain sources of this financing, taking into account resources from governm ent, the private sector, and nongovernm ental organizations, and including resources from dom estic as w ell as international sources; and identify N B SA P activities that are currently funded; 2.3 A ssess financial needs for additional activities from the N B SA Ps and their relative priority; and 2.4 C alculate 20% of the am ount currently allocated for biodiversity conservation and sustainable use, and, w ith the involvem ent of key stakeholders, develop, dissem inate and im plem ent a strategy to m obilize that am ount in addition to the current allocation. 3.1 G ather inform ation from all sources on the value 80 of biodiversity in the country and thus on the m ost im portant com ponents of biodiversity and their ecosystem services, starting w ith the critical values of "flagship" species and ecosystem s. M ethods for biodiversity valuation have been published, but the country w ill develop national guidelines for biodiversity valuation to ensure coherence in the values allocated to com ponents of biodiversity; 3.2 R aise aw areness on opportunities and constraints for integrating biodiversity values into local and national planning, decision-m aking and reporting processes, based on experiences in C am bodia and in other countries; 3.3 Identify groups of people to be in charge of Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targetst 2 (Aichi Target 20 75): By 2020, at the , the national budget allocation for versity conservation and sustainable use ding NBSAP implementation) has ased by 20 %

through the development mplementation of a resource mobilization gy based on identified needs and taking into nt international and national guidance and es arget is in line with Theme 18 on Resource ization, Strategic Objective 2. Achievement get 1 and all the other targets will depend y on financial resources that will be ized.

x

Increase, w

ithin the national budgnum

ber of item

s clearly relating torange of actions dealing w

ith biodconservation and sustainable use; increase in am

ounts of financial reallocated.

x

B iodiversity Trust Fund, includingprotected areas fund

76 has been esin line w

ith the Environm

ent EndoFund

77 and the N

ational Forestry D evelopm

ent Fund

78, and am

ountresources in the trust fund. x

Increase in total bilateral biodiverrelated O

D A com

m itm

ents by m

ethe O

EC D D A C , G

EF funding anfrom

other sources (conventional innovative sources) allocated to biodiversity. t 3 (Aichi Target 2 79): 20, at the latest, biodiversity values have integrated into national and sub-national opment and poverty reduction strategies lanning processes. arget is in line with Strategic Objective 1  Theme 20 on Awareness, Education, rch Coordination and Development. g awareness about biodiversity and its le values is considered as one of the highest ties for the implementation of the NBSAP. ties considered under this target will bute to the achievement of most of the other s.

x

N um ber of assessm

ents of biodivevalues, in accordance w

ith the C

ox

Extent of integration of values andfunctions of biodiversity into deveplans, and sectoral and developm

epolicies including EIA

and SEA

, aand sub-national levels. x

A m ounts of resources allocated tom

anagem

ent of biodiversity in relsectoral budgets.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

163

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

integrating into national and sub-national developm entand poverty reduction strategies and planning processes. M obilize them and develop guidelines to assist them , first, in the inclusion of those values of biodiversity that are easiest to account for. D evelopm ent of national guidelines for the applicationof biodiversity-inclusive environm ental im pact assessm ent (EIA ) and strategic environm ental assessm ent (SEA ) using the voluntary guideline developed under the C onvention on B iological D iversity (C B D C O P decision V III/28) w ould be am ong the first areas for integrating biodiversity values; 3.4 B uilding on the N ational G reen G row th R oadm ap 81, w hich has been developed for furthering developm ent to benefit the people and conserve and restore the natural capital base to continue econom ic grow th w ithin the lim its posed by the ecosystem carrying capacity, enhance consideration of biodiversity in key econom ic sector developm ent plans and landscape level planning. C oordination am ong governm ent m inistries and different levels of governm ent at the national and local levels. In addition, tim e, financial resources and both technical and adm inistrative capacity w ill be needed. 4.1 G ather inform ation on freshw ater fisheries and aquaculture, their im pact on fish stocks and on aquatic threatened species and vulnerable ecosystem s; on m anagem ent plans already in place; on factors driving freshw ater fisheries and aquaculture; and on stakeholders, including the level and trend of dem and for fish; 4.2 G ather representatives of all stakeholder groups to design and agree on m anagem ent plans that could include catch reductions, quotas to gear restrictions, partial, periodic or full fishery closures, establishm ent Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targets

et 4 (Aichi Target 6 82):  By 2020, water fisheries and aquaculture are aged sustainably by addressing their traints, and by reducing and preventing  possible negative impact on fish stocks on aquatic threatened species and erable ecosystems 83 target is directly in line with Theme 10 on water Fisheries and Aquaculture, Theme 2 reatened Species, Theme 7 on W

ater urces, Theme 8 on Biodiversity and Climate

x

From

N SD S: ¾

H igh diversity of fish species¾

Fish populations w

ith sustainablereproduction. ¾

Favorable habitats for spaw

nifeeding. ¾

G ood w

ater quality w

ithout p¾

Protection of fish species during period. ¾

R ules for avoiding over-fishin

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

164

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

of conservation areas or recovery plans, and other m easures that w ill rebuild fisheries stocks that have been overexploited or depleted, taking into account the status and trends of fish stocks, aquaculture, fishing m ethods used, the law on fisheries, and the ecosystem approach, and bearing in m ind that a target in the 2009 N SD S stated that by 2015, the use of sustainable fishery practices w as to be achieved in 70% of the fishing w aters of the country. 4.3 Support decision-m aking w ith research in particular on fish stock sustainability and harvesting w ithin safe ecological lim its. 4.4 Establish and support com m unity-based fisheries and fish sanctuaries/conservation areas; and expand aquaculture. Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targetsge, and Theme 16 on Customary use and tional Knowledge. Progress toward the vement of this target will benefit from the mentation of a number of targets such as s 1, 2, 3, 6 to 10, 12, and 16 to 19.

destructive fishing practices. ¾

Strict enforcem

ent of rules ¾

Sustainable fishing practices ¾

Sustainable aquaculture practx

R eduction in illegal fishing levelsx

N um bers and areas of fish sanctuaIncrease in num

bers and areas. x

M anagem

ent effectiveness of fishsanctuaries: im

provem

ent in m

anaeffectiveness. x

Fish stock levels and status of aquecosystem

: their m

aintenance or rto levels that are sustainable. x

Proportion of fish stocks w

ithin sabiological lim

its. x

M anagem

ent plans addressing illefishing: existence of plans and statheir effective im

plem

entation. Spm anagem

ent and conservation actproduced for freshw

ater fish, in paendangered species 84: existence oand status of their effective im

plex

R eduction in num

ber and levels oconstraints listed under N

B

SA P thkey actions 1.2 and 2.1. x

Im plem

entation of other key actioincluding relevant legislation relaim

pact of fisheries on aquatic biodcom

ponents under them

e 10. x

IU C N R ed List Index and its trend

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

165

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

5.1 A ssess the m ain areas in the country used for agriculture, including anim al production, aquaculture and forestry; 5.2 D em arcate clear agriculture, aquaculture and forest m anagem ent unit boundaries, and ensure enforcem ent of legal fram ew orks for the protection of resources in these areas; 5.3 Identify m easures that are in place to ensure sustainability and describe their effectiveness. Encourage successful m easures and scale them up as needed; 5.4 U ndertake research to describe and agree on national sustainability criteria (building on A ddis A baba Principles and G uidelines for the Sustainable U se of B iodiversity developed under the C onvention on B iological D iversity) for agro-ecosystem s and aquaculture as there is no universally-agreed sustainability criteria except for sustainable forest m anagem ent; 5.5 C arry out research to describe the opportunities and constraints to enhancing sustainable m anagem ent of agriculture, including anim al production, aquaculture and forestry; bearing in m ind that the 2009 N SD S targeted a m inim um of 60% forest cover m anaged in a sustainable w ay, w ith the participation of the local com m unity by 2015; 5.6 Increase education, practical training and aw areness-raising activities to prom ote involvem ent /engagem ent of all, including local com m unities and indigenous ethnic m inorities, public and private sectors, and civil and religious societies; 5.7 C arry out research on the role of m odern biotechnology in agriculture including anim al production, aquaculture and forestry; Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targetst 5 (Aichi Target 7 85): By 2020 the rity of areas under agriculture 86, animal ction, aquaculture 87 and forestry 88 are ged sustainably, ensuring conservation of ersity, sustainable developm

ent, poverty ation and im

proved w

ell-being. arget goes with themes 10 on aquaculture,  forest resources, and 13 on agriculture and l production. Relevant actions are d from the programmes of work developed  the Convention on Biological Diversity and s already adopted by the country under relevant strategies and actions plans (see  1 for list of strategies and plans). portant to note that there may be a link en forestry, agriculture, aquaculture and l production, like in socioecological ction landscape under the Satoyama tive. arget is linked to target 4 (regarding ulture), target 8 on protected areas and rvation areas, particularly protected forests  few other targets. Indeed, reducing forest nd degradation is essential for sustainable  management, which in turn contributes to duction and elimination of habitat loss by eforestation and degradation. In addition, nably managed forests also provide, by tion, ecosystem conservation. ration of agro-ecosystems and forest stems including mangroves that have been  a lot of pressures in recent years (target 6) e an important step towards the sustainable gement of these ecosystems. The sustainable

x

A rea of forests certified by ForestStew

ardship C

ouncil (FSC

) and thProgram

for the Endorsem

ent of FC ertification (PEFC

): increase in of certified forest areas. x

A reas under agriculture, anim

al pand aquaculture w

here m

anagem

esustainable (including in the type farm

ing. x

System

s/practices, soil m

anagem

eharvesting being w

ithin ecologicaa long term

). H

arvested products be certified. x

Percent of forest area certified for suforestry.

x

A quaculture production, and prodover tim

e. x

N um ber of capacity building w

orkand of people inform

ed and/or trasustainable m

anagem

ent practicesm onitoring. x

Enforcem

ent of law

s and m

easureto the sustainable use of biologicaresources.

x

Trend and projections in biodiversharvested for food and m

edicine (to agriculture, forestry, anim

al proand aquaculture). x

D em ands of products from

agricuanim

al production, aquaculture anforestry, and their yields.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

166

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

5.8 Enhance cooperation w ith C G IA R centers, ITTO , FA O and other organizations w orking on sustainable m anagem ent in agro-ecosystem s, forestry and aquaculture; and 5.9 Im prove enabling environm ent: ¾ Im prove w ater m anagem ent for agriculture, forestry, anim al production and aquaculture; ¾ Im prove tenure security and land m arkets; and ¾ Im prove infrastructure for m arket accessibility and prom ote m arketability of the products. 6.1 Identify protected areas and conservation areas (including R am sar sites and biosphere reserves), agro-ecosystem s and forest ecosystem s that have been Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targetsgement of ecosystems sought through this t 5 will (i) maintain at an appropriate level prove the status of threatened species of  and flora, and thus contribute to the vement of Target 10, (ii) enhance the nce of the ecosystems that are being ged sustainably, and may contribute to n stocks and thus to climate change tion and adaptation and to combating tification (Target 11). In addition, in agro- stems, enhancing organic carbon contents of

an improve land productivity. Soils with sed carbon stocks have better retention of  and, hence, climate resilience. Increased arbon sequestration can make farming a net n sink and hence mitigate GHGs, and (iii) bute to the halving of the rate of loss of al forests, and the reduction of the dation and fragmentation of the ecosystems  consideration, as well as the tion/prevention of pollution, overharvesting, uction of invasive alien species and their impacts. espect of traditional knowledge, innovations ractices (Target 18), resource mobilization et 2), reduction of pollutants (Target 16), l and eradication of invasive alien species et 18), database and information systems et 19), the protection of genetic diversity of ated plants and farmed and domesticated ls, as well as their in-situ and ex-situ rvation (Target 20) will all support the vement of Target 5.

t 6 (Aichi Target 14 89): By 2020, 10%

of rotected areas, conservation areas, agro- stems and forest ecosystems, including

x

N um ber of dem

arcated areas underesponsibility / m

anagem

ent of loccom

m unities (assum

ing that m

ana

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

167

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

degraded and require restoration, in order to recover the lost ecosystem services; 6.2 Identify and assess the pressures and underlying factors supporting these pressures; 6.3 Identify and dem arcate 10% of these areas that can be considered as priorities areas for reasons such as urgency: they can be lost forever or they are having the m ost significantly adverse im pact on w om en, elders and children of the local and indigenous com m unities, or because their restoration can have the m ost significant benefits and yield the m ost significantsecondary benefits for the ecosystem s and the populations depending on them , and for the country‟s econom y and developm ent; 6.4 U ndertake restoration activities and follow up on them to ensure their success, w hile controlling the pressures that led to the degradation of the ecosystem s and their constrained provision of ecosystem services, including through the rem oval of negative incentives and the prom otion of positive ones; 6.5 Put in place m echanism s for m onitoring the im provem ent of ecosystem services and their im pact particularly on w om en, elders and children from local com m unities and indigenous ethnic m inority groups; 6.6 Strengthen the enabling environm ent (policy, financial resources); and 6.7 In order to succeed, it is im portant that local com m unities, indigenous ethnic m inorities, the private sector and other stakeholders are involved as m uch as possible in every step; also that aw areness is raised am ong populations at all levels of the society regarding the value of ecosystem s and their services, so that there is a transform ational change in the w ay people consider biodiversity and ecosystem services Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targetsroves, that have been under a lot of ures in recent years are in an advanced of restoration and are providing ced services, particularly to women, s and children of local communities and enous ethnic minority groups. arget is relevant to the themes on protected ystem (theme 1), agriculture (theme 13) and  resources (theme 12) and its mentation should be in synergy or at least inated with the achievement of targets 1, 2, 1, 12, 15, 16 and 20. Finally, the vement of Targets 9, 17 and 19 will provide tives, knowledge and data / information that cilitate the implementation of this Target 6. ration of forest ecosystems will be made g in mind the strategic indicators for NFP term monitoring, in particular that, by 2029, est cover will have to be increased to 60%  total land area; (ii) Sustainable forest gement with prescribed silviculture will to be implemented on 2.4 million hectares of ction forest; (iii) Protected Forest covers d reach 3 million hectares, 500,000 hectares h value commercial plantation should be ished and 10 million tree seedlings uted per year; and (iv) ion ha of forest land should be set aside for unity Forestry (CF) groups (approximately  CF) fully recognized with CF agreements.

of local com

m unities has m

ore chbeing sustainable and of contribuneeds of local com

m unities, w

om children and indigenous peoples. increase could indicate positive sttow

ard achieving the target. x

R ed list index for biodiversity in areas, conservation areas and foreecosystem

s. x

Trend and projections in biodiverharvested for food and m

edicine (to agro-ecosystem

s, forestry, and production). x

D em and for products from

agricuanim

al production, aquaculture anforestry, and their yields. x

Indicators can be expressed basedservices provided by the ecosystecrop yields in agro-ecosystem

, am m edicinal products harvested sustnum

ber of projects focusing on suuse of biological resources, w

om echildren, indigenous peoples and com

m unities. x

Flow

of funds for the restoration oprotected areas, conservation areaecosystem

s and forest ecosystem

sm angroves that have been under apressures.

x

N um ber of participants have invoconservation program

m es.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

168

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

as national capital/assets. Bearing in mind that although Cambodia currently has a relatively small ecological footprint, its small biocapacity results in a deficit of about 0.1 global hectares per person 91. Cambodia has adopted strategies and plans (including the National Strategic Development Plan Update and the Green Growth Roadmap) that are favorable to the well-being of the people of Cambodia in a sustainable manner. In order to meet Target 7: to develop an ecologically sustainable system of production and consumption in all economic sectors (agriculture, food production, garments, energy, mining, fisheries, forestry, transport, transformation), the country will: 7.1 C om pile inform ation and undertake research on the im pact of current production m ethods and consum ption patterns on ecosystem s and their services; 7.2 A ssess the ecological footprint of industries operating in C am bodia; 7.3 R aise aw areness of the G overnm ent, the private sector and other stakeholders regarding the negative im pacts of unsustainable production and consum ption; 7.4 Form ulate and im plem ent a national strategy for sustainable production and consum ption building on best practices, the voluntary 10-Y ear Fram ew ork of Program m es on Sustainable C onsum ption and Production Patterns adopted at the R io+20 C onference, the G reen G row th R oadm ap and other developm ent strategies adopted earlier by the country. The strategy w ill contain inter alia: standards for sustainable production and consum ption, and for a better quality of life; for the protection of natural resources and the prom otion of a m ore efficient use of natural resources, products and recovered m aterials; for the prom otion of the life cycle approaches, Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

t 7 (Aichi Target 4 90): By 2020, the rnment, the private sector and other holders have taken steps to reduce the ive impacts on ecosystems and their es caused by unsustainable production onsumption activities. arget is particularly relevant to Themes 17 ustry and other themes where reference is  to production and consumption, and the gement of biological resources.  and opportunities regarding production onsumption of biological resources in odia are described under the Theme 4 on g above. vement of Target 7 will be in synergy and ination with the achievement of Target 5 inable management of agricultural, animal, ulture and forestry productions), Target 6 rding the provision of enhanced services ood, water, wood and non-timber forest cts) from protected areas, conservation , agro-ecosystems and forest ecosystems that

been under a lot of pressures in recent ), Target 10 (on species of fauna and flora ened by unsustainable production and mption), Target 11 (in the sense that nable production and consumption e.g. gh the promotion of low carbon technology ontribute to enhanced carbon stocks), t 12 (reduction of habitat degradation, ion and overharvesting from unsustainable ction and consumption), Targets 15 and 16 ction of pollution and exploitation from opogenic pressures ), Target 17 (on

x

R eports on im

pact of current prodm ethods and consum

ption patternecosystem

s and their services. x

D ata on ecological footprint of inoperating in C

am bodia x

A national strategy for sustainablproduction and consum

ption x

M arket based incentives (such as prices) developed for sustainable production and consum

ption

92. x

Legislations and other program

s (grow

th developm

ent, Satoyama Isupporting sustainable developm

eestablished and im

plem

ented. x

N um ber of certified products com

m ercialized, in relation to susproduction x

Trend in degraded state of ecosyscaused by production and consum activities x

Trend in biological diversity as afproduction and consum

ption x

N um ber of enterprises applying sproduction m

ethods based on devstandards; x

N ew technologies adopted or ada

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

169

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

including resource efficiency and sustainable use of resources; as w ell as science-based and traditional know ledge-based approaches, and the 3-R concept (reduce, reuse and recycle) and other related m ethodologies, as needed. The Strategy w ill call for the engagem ent of all, in particular the private sector, along the life cycle of products in efforts to achieve a shift tow ards sustainable consum ption and production, particularly sectors w ith a high environm ental and social im pact. The national strategy for sustainable production and consum ption w ill be supported by the prom ulgation of legislations or regulations on sustainable production and consum ption in line w ith existing law s; a strong inform ation system at the interface of science and policy that w ill facilitate the exchange of inform ation and cooperation; a program m e on com m unication, education, and public aw areness building on ongoing initiatives, and on scientific and technological capacity building for the acquisition and adaptation of green technology; and the establishm ent of financial m echanism s to support investm ents for the recycling of w astes, adoption of cleaner production m ethods and, in general, sustainable consum ption and production patterns; 7.5 The creation of green jobs and m arket opportunities w ill serve as incentives for the adoption of sustainable production and consum ption. Regarding the development and implementation of management plans for each protected area and each conservation area 8.1 C onduct a rapid/coarse assessm ent of m anagem ent effectiveness such as the W W F R apid A ssessm ent and Prioritization of Protected A reas M anagem ent (R A PPA M ), so as to identify strategic actions w ith Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targetstional knowledge and customary use that e used to ensure sustainable production and mption), and Target 19 (on information /clearing-house mechanism for ration and exchange of relevant information chnologies). The Protected area system et 8) and the protection of genetic diversity et 20) will contribute to sustainable ction and consumption of biological rces. Target 9 on Payment for ecosystem es can serve as an incentive.

t 8 (Aichi Target 11 93): In 2020, at the , existing protected areas and rvation areas, including community-  natural resource management areas, management plans and have started ive implementation.

x

R eport on the conclusion of the raassessm

ents of m

anagem

ent effecx

Strategic M

anagem

ent Plan for Pconservation areas. x

N um ber of updated and new

m anplans.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

170

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

regards to protected areas, conservation areas and their netw ork for achieving national conservation and developm ent objectives m ore surely and effectively; 8.2 D evelop subsequently the strategic m anagem ent plan called for in the 2008 Protected A rea Law , w hich should include inter alia: ¾ A time schedule for conducting (rapid and more comprehensive) assessments of management effectiveness of protected areas and other conservation areas; ¾ Plans for identifying an agreed set of standards, baselines and best practices for m anagem ent m ethods and m ethods for ensuring effective and efficient m anagem ent of protected areas and other conservation areas, taking into account regional experiences; ¾ Plans for setting in place a m echanism for m onitoring and reporting on protected areas, conservation areas and the w hole national protected areas system ; ¾ A proposed budget or a strategy for m obilizing financial resources for all these activities and w ays and m eans for the m obilization of funds and other resources needed. 8.3 D evelop m anagem ent plans for respective PA s and conservation areas. For doubling marine and coastal PAs and freshwater PAs from the 2010 levels: 8.4 A ssess the 2010 coverage of m arine and coastal PA s and freshw ater i.e. the G ulf of Thailand M PA (covering 9,210 ha, as per 2014 W D PA data) and four of the seven national parks, and one of the three m ultiple use protected areas, w hich are coastal and m arine protected areas. W hen planning to double this area, it is useful to consider connecting w ith the M PA Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets20,

the coverage of marine and coastal protected areas and freshwater protected areas has at least doubled as compared to the 2010 levels;

Currently unprotected areas of particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services that are under a lot of pressures from human activities are identified and integrated in the protected area system; and

Protected areas and conservation areas have been valued, are part of a well-connected protected area system and have been integrated in national sustainable development goals and national green growth strategies, plans and programmes; 29, protected forest covers 3.0 million res, in line with the objectives of the nal Forest Programme 2010-2029 arget supports targets 10 and 11 because re among measures that can be taken to (i) ss factors affecting threatened fauna and species, and (ii) enhance ecosystem nce and the contribution of biodiversity to n stock, and thus contribute to climate e mitigation and adaptation and to ating desertification, respectively. ition, PAs are mechanisms that can be used reduce the rate of loss of natural forests, reefs and other natural habitats (Target 12),

lve the anthropogenic pressures on coral and vulnerable ecosystems impacted by te change (Target 15), and (iii) protect wild

x

N um ber of PA

M E assessm

ents. x

N um ber of PA

s and conservationw here m

anagem

ent plans are beinim plem

ented. x

N um ber of rangers in protected arnum

ber per area, and their Equipm x

Plan for doubling m

arine and coafrom

2010 level. x

Establishm

ent of the M

PA

that w the coral reefs around K

oh R

ong

R ong Sam

loem

islands and alongSihanouk province‟s coast. x

Plan for the expansion of the protthe Tonle Sap-M

ekong peat sw

am x

Studies, plans and im

plem

entatioplans for establishing protected arconservation areas in K

am pong TLom

phat, Sesan R

iver, Stung / C

h

K am pong Svay and W

estern Siem IB A s, and m

anagem

ent plans for protected areas/conservation areax

Studies for ensuring connectivity,needed, am

ong PA

s and conservaand establishm

ent of corridors or PA

s that w

ill establish the neededconnections x

Studies on valuation of PA

s and conservation areas x

x

Strategies and actions for integratw ider landscapes and seascapes asustainable developm

ent goals, asm onitoring, evaluating and adapti

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

171

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

planned for the protection of the coral reefs around K oh R ong and K oh R ong Sam loem islands94 and along Preah Sihanouk province‟s coast; 8.5 R egarding freshw ater protection, it is necessary to bear in m ind that C am bodia adopted the Strategic Planning Fram ew ork 2010-2019 for Fisheries w ith the follow ing targets: ¾ A t least 35% of the area of inland flooded forest and at least 75% of the area of coastal flooded forest are protected through physical dem arcations by the end of 2019. ¾ A t least 40 of the 97 U pper M ekong deep pools are effectively protected and conserved and at least 80% of the G reat Lake fish sanctuaries are im proved through boundary dem arcation, protection and public aw areness by the end of 2019. ¾ Post-2019, it w ill be a goal to com plete the protection of all flooded forest, deep pools, sanctuaries and other critical habitats. Regarding integration in the protected area system of currently unprotected areas of particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services that are under a lot of pressures. 8.6 B earing in m ind that all terrestrial ecoregions are under protection (20 to 62% coverage of the respective ecoregions) except the Tonle Sap-M ekong peat sw am p forests, of w hich only 0.6% are protected, w hile a significant portion (> 90% ) of this ecoregion is under hum an pressure adversely affecting the rem aining native vegetation, a study w ill be carried out urgently to dem arcate an area of this ecoregion for designation as a protected area. A m anagem ent plan containing, am ong other points, guidelines for the participation of local com m unities and indigenous Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targetsves of genetic resources (Target 20). e protected areas would specifically protect reefs (Targets 12 and 15) and be used as a r fisheries sustainable management (Target ilarly, forest protected areas and rvation areas are tools for sustainable forest

gement (Target 5). arget 8 is complemented by target 6 (By  10%

of those protected areas […

] that have under a lot of pressures in recent years are advanced state of restoration and are ing enhanced services, particularly to local unities women, elders, children and nous peoples ). vement of Target 9 on Payment for stem Services can serve as a source of g for activities under PAs and thus serve as entive.

m echanism

s x

Plans for expanding protected forefrom

the current coverage to 3.0 m hectares by 2029, and steps in im

plem

enting the plans

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

172

ethnic m inorities, and an assessm ent of the resources required to ensure the protection and restoration of this ecoregion w ill be developed and used; 8.7 In addition, although m ost Im portant B ird A reas (IB A ) are covered by protected areas, the follow ing five sites are in critical situations due essentially to agricultural expansion and intensification, hum an intrusions and disturbances, energy production and m ining, overexploitation of som e species, in particular w ood harvesting and collection of non-tim ber products: K am pong Trach, Lom phat, Sesan R iver, Stung / C hi K reng / K am pong Svay and W estern Siem Pang. Studies and consultations w ill be undertaken urgently to dem arcate areas for protection, assess the resources needed as w ell as the value and possible revenues from these protected areas. Plans w ill be developed for the effective m anagem ent of these areas, including guidelines for the participation of local com m unities and indigenous ethnic m inorities as w ell as plans for strengthening institutions and hum an capacities; 8.8 B oth these IB A s and the Tonle Sap-M ekong peat sw am p forests ecoregions include w etlands/freshw ater that w ill also be protected (as part of the first part of sub-paragraph (i) of this target). It should be noted that, in order to ensure connectivity am ong protected areas and conservation areas, corridors m ay be considered for addition to the protected area system . A study w ill be conducted to assess the needs for establishing corridors am ong protected areas and conservation areas. Regarding valuation of PAs and conservation areas. 8.9 C arry out an assessm ent of the full range of ecosystem services provided by PA s that are critical to the econom y and social w ell-being of the population. This Cambodia Biodiversity Target

Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targets

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

173

assessm ent w ill also estim ate the costs associated w ith the loss of these services, and the costs of m anaging the PA s. Regarding integration in national sustainable development goals and national green growth strategies, plans and programmes. 8.10 C om pile inform ation on the integration of PA s in national sustainable developm ent goals from relevant initiatives such as the landscape integration project, called "C A L M "95 . B uilding on those experiences: ¾ create a group of partners and decide on a core group; and set the goals to achieve by integrating PA s in sustainable developm ent goals, as w ell as param eters; ¾ assess the broader context consisting of a review of the protection context (existing PA s and their effectiveness, additional PA s needed), the ecological context (ecosystem s/habitats and their value; key biodiversity and connectivity gaps in ecosystem s and PA s), the socio-econom ic, policy and sectoral opportunities and constraints; ¾ develop and im plem ent strategies and actions taking into account the gaps and opportunities ¾ establish m onitoring, evaluating and adapting m echanism s 8.11 A lso see actions under Target 3 for additional actions. Regarding achievement of the objective of the National Forest Programme 2010-2029 to have 3.0 million hectares of protected forest cover by 2029, and bearing in mind that currently, the surface area of protected forests is about 1.63 million ha, 8.12 A study w ill be carried out to identify forest areas of significant ecological, biological and socioeconom ic im portance requiring protection or restoration. These Cambodia Biodiversity Target

Specific actions

Indicators of progress towards

achievement of the targets

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

174

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

areas w ill be m apped out taking into account land tenure and access rights issues, dem arcated and subm itted for designation. A s noted in the N FP, given the diversity of the legal status ascribed to different land units in C am bodia such as forest reserves, w ildlife reserves, protection forests and national parks, efforts should be m ade to ensure coherence and synergy w ith respect to conservation value. 9.1 R aise aw areness about PES schem es, opportunities, requirem ents, risks and constraints, and build/strengthen capacity for valuation of ecosystem services; 9.2 Identify ecosystem service prospects including their m arketable value, and potential buyers / beneficiaries in the country and region; 9.3 A ssess and build/strengthen institutional (including legal, policy, land ow nership context and existing rules for PES m arkets and deals) and technical capacity; 9.4 R eview options for paym ent and contract types, and develop PES agreem ents; 9.5 Im plem ent PES agreem ents, and set in place m echanism s for m onitoring, as w ell as ensuring com pliance and enforcem ent, and for evaluating the deal/agreem ent; and 9.6 C om pile experiences/case studies in the national clearing-house m echanism for aw areness-raising and education program m es. 10.1 C om pile a list of threatened species of fauna and flora, assess their status and trends, and describe their ecological and socioeconom ic im portance; 10.2 Identify and describe their direct and underlying Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

t 9 (Aichi Target 3 96): By 2020, Payment cosystem Services (PES) is used ghout the country as an incentive for the rvation and sustainable use of versity. arget is relating to Theme 18 on Resource ization. Its implementation will benefit all her targets dealing directly or indirectly cosystems and biological resources as an tive for conservation and sustainable use

x

N um ber of biodiversity friendly iand PES program

s or projects devand im

plem

ented. x

N um ber of legislations regarding for Ecosystem

Service (PES) devand im

plem

ented. x

Status of key ecosystem

services benefits in areas targeted by PES.t 10 (Aichi Target 12 97): By 2020, all s of fauna and flora threatened at nal level have been identified and their  has been improved significantly as a

x

N ational R

ed List of threatened spThis list could be updated every tand autom

atically aligned w

ith w legislation.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

175

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

threats; 10.3 In a participatory w ay and taking into account the know ledge, know -how and practices of local com m unities and indigenous ethnic m inorities, put forw ard and im plem ent m easures to address the direct and underlying threats. Som e of the direct threats w ere considered under other strategic them es in this N B SA P, such as m ining (Them e 4), clim ate change (Them e 8), overharvesting and ecosystem degradation (Them es 9 to 14), pollution (e.g., Them es 17 and 22), invasive alien species (Them es 12 and 13), and m anufacturing industries, biotechnology / biosafety and tourism (Them e 17), w hile the them es in G roup 3 dealt in general w ith underlying threats. B oth ex-situ and in-situ conservation or establishm ent and effective m anagem ent of PA s are am ong actions required to conserve and im prove the status of threatened species; 10.4 R aise aw areness about threatened species; and 10.5 M onitor and assess effectiveness of m easures taken Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets of applying measures to address their ctive threats.  arget is relevant to Theme 2 on endangered s. Also, actions required for the rvation of threatened species of fauna and under this Target 10 will likely include ation and effective management of ted areas and conservation areas (Theme 1 rget 8). Ex-situ conservation (Theme 3) can lement these actions. M

ining (Theme 4), tainable tourism (Theme 17), forest rsion to agricultural lands (Themes 12 and ollution and wastes from manufacturing tries (Theme 17), unsustainable energy ction (Theme 14) and climate change e 8) can be cited among the direct threats  to species of flora and fauna. ition, actions necessary to meet this Target ll also deliver substantial contributions to Cambodia Biodiversity Targets. For le, (i) an effectively managed protected ystem will contribute to the reduction in the f loss of natural habitats (Target 8); (ii) ulture can relieve the stress of fishing on ocks and well managed fisheries, lture, animal production and forestry ets 4 and 5) will ensure that these sectors have nificant adverse impacts on threatened species. rly, actions taken to achieve other targets Target 1 on raising awareness about the  of components of biodiversity, Targets 6 1 putting forward ecosystem restoration, t 7 for the sustainable production and mption of biological resources and stem services, Target 15 to reduce opogenic pressures on biodiversity

x

O ther lists of threatened species iC

ITES appendices. x

D escription of the ecological andsocioeconom

ic im

portance of threspecies, and possibly the consequtheir loss, for aw

areness-raising program

m es. x

A w areness-raising program

m es insections on threatened species. x

N um ber of habitat restoration proand species recovery action plansof these program

m es and action penable the best m

anagem

ent and conservation of threatened speciex

Size and distribution of habitats fthreatened species identified. x

Species A

ction Plans produced foSpecies A

ction Plan (A

SA P) C

ritEndangered V

ertebrates. x

A ll A

SA P species protected w

ithi

C am bodian protected area netw

orx

N um ber and size of habitats hostiendangered species.

x

N um ber of illegal activities on thethreatened species: decline in theand size indicates progress tow

ardachievem

ent of the target. x O ccurrence of threats: reduction ioccurrence and im

pact of threats/is a sign of progress tow

ards the rof threatened fauna and flora spec

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

176

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

11.1 Identify and assess the status and trends of degraded forests including m angroves, degraded PA s, degraded conservation areas and other degraded ecosystem s such as agro-ecosystem s and w etlands; 11.2 Identify and assess the direct and underlying causes of ecosystem degradation; 11.3 Enhance aw areness about clim ate change m itigation and adaptation m easures in the country; 11.4 U ndertake studies on ecosystem s resilience and restoration in C am bodia and in the region; 11.5 A pply best practices to identified degraded ecosystem s for their restoration and resilience, and assess their contribution to carbon stocks, taking into account ongoing initiatives im plem enting, am ong other national strategies and plans, the 2006 N ational A daptation Program m e of A ction on C lim ate C hange, and the C am bodia C lim ate C hange Strategic Plan 2014-2023, and in synergy w ith ongoing initiatives in the context of the C lean D evelopm ent M echanism (C D M ), R ED D + and other carbon financing m echanism s for clim ate change m itigation and adaptation; 11.6 Legislation and incentives; and 11.7 Strengthen hum an, institutional, technological and financial capacities building. A ctions identified for Target 8 are also relevant here. 12.1 C onduct biodiversity assessm ents/inventories of natural habitats, w ith em phasis on natural forests Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targetsonents impacted by climate change, Target  the reduction of pollutant pressures on stems, and Target 18 for controlling ve alien species) will support actions ds the achievement of this Target 10.. t 11 (Aichi Target 15 98): By 2020, stem resilience and the contribution of versity to carbon stocks have been ced, through the conservation and ation of degraded ecosystems, focusing in ular on degraded forests, protected areas onservation areas, thereby contributing ate change mitigation and adaptation o combating desertification. arget is in arget is applicable to all degraded stems but it is particularly relevant to e 1 on protected area system, Theme 8 on ersity and climate change, Theme 9 on s, Theme 13 on agricultural lands, and e 4 on mining. Actions envisaged under  other themes will support actions for this ; for example, under Theme 6 and Group 3 s. ch, this target will reinforce progress toward

hievement of Target 5 (Sustainable gement of forests and agricultural lands), t 6 (for 10 %

ecosystem restoration), Target PA system), Target 15 (on controlling opogenic pressures) and will benefit from s undertaken for Targets 19 (on clearing -  mechanism), 17 (traditional knowledge).

x

N um ber and extent (area) of restorehabilitation program

m es x

Legislations on forestry and otherresources, revised as needed to enadequate integration of biodiversiassociated ecosystem

services, anenforcem

ent. x

R

ED

D + projects x

N um ber of ecosystem

s represente

C am bodian protected area system of w

ell m

anaged protected areas w zonation, m

anagem

ent plans, andstaff x

Level of species, genetic and habdiversity: the higher the level, thethe chances of having resilience et 12 (Aichi Target 5 99): By 2020, the rate s of natural forests 100, coral reefs and

x

N um ber of persons/Institutions cainventories and biodiversity asses

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

177

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

including m angroves, coral reefs, w etlands, areas around river banks, lake shores, and un-protected biodiversity hotspots; 12.2 C om pile inform ation on their status and trends from diverse sources including scientists, local com m unities, indigenous ethnic m inorities and citizens at large, bearing in m ind that inform ation on forests has been subm itted regularly in the context of the FA O Forest R esource A ssessm ent; 12.3 C onduct studies to assess the rate of loss of these natural habitats / ecosystem s and calculate the end point to half the rate of loss; 12.4 Identify the direct and indirect causes of loss of these natural habitats / ecosystem s. A m ong these, docum ent and assess in particular the im pact of the follow ing drivers: habitat degradation and fragm entation, pollution, overharvesting, introduction of invasive alien species. O ther drivers of biodiversity loss should be kept in m ind, including coastal developm ent, agricultural conversion, w ater diversions, channelization, construction of dam s and roads, and clim ate induced sea level rise; 12.5 D escribe and assess the effectiveness of m easures taken to address the causes of habitat / ecosystem loss, in particular habitat degradation and fragm entation, pollution, overharvesting, introduction of invasive alien species, and docum ent best practices.M easures to be considered w ill include actions to be taken under other targets such as Targets 1 and 3 (valuation of biodiversity, aw areness of the values and integration in developm ent plans), Target 5 (sustainable aquaculture to reduce the stress on fisheries, and sustainable forest m anagem ent), Target 7 (sustainable production and consum ption and em phasis on efficiency and the 3-R concept), Target 8 Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets natural habitats is at least halved; and at degradation and fragmentation, tion, overharvesting, introduction of ive alien species and their impacts are ficantly reduced. arget is applicable to all natural habitats ome focus on natural forests and coral  and also applicable to all direct causes of versity loss. As such, implementation of ns under all the other themes will support hievement of this target. In addition, ving this target has potential synergies and nefits associated with many other Targets, ially with respect to Targets 5, 6 (ecosystem ration), 7 (sustainable production and mption), 8 (protected area system), 11 ystem resilience), 15 (reducing opogenic pressures) and 18 (control of ive alien species).

natural habitats x

N um ber of natural habitats under w

ith functional m

anagem

ent planx

Plans of habitat loss prevention, ahabitat restoration.

x

Size of habitat restored and/or prox

N um ber and capacity of rangers aoperational equipm

ent and facilitipreventing habitat losses. x

C overage/Extent of natural habitax

(A nnual) rate of loss of natural ha

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

178

(Protected area system ) including designation of heritage sites under U N ESC O or w etlands under the R am sar C onvention, Target 10 (protection of threatened species), Target 15 (reducing anthropogenic pressures on natural habitats im pacted by clim ate change), and Target 18 (control of invasive alien species). These m easures can be prioritized using such criteria as (i) m easures w ith im m ediate im pacts on the ground in addressing the drivers of change, (ii) starting w ith actions having zero or negative costs; then actions having a relatively low cost but high im pact; and finally actions that are expensive to carry out especially if their im pact is lim ited; and (iii) actions that can sim ultaneously help achieve other Targets; 12.6 D evelop plans to control the causes of loss, in particular habitat degradation and fragm entation, pollution, overharvesting, introduction of invasive alien species, including through the strengthening of som e of the m easures taken and application of new ones; 12.7 B uild and strengthen the capacities, including hum an, institutional, technological and financial capacities, needed for the im plem entation of the plans. ¾ D evelop and im plem ent com m unication plans and integrate consideration of natural habitats/ecosystem issues in education and aw areness-raising program m es; ¾ Enhance the enabling conditions including by strengthening participation, cooperation and coordination (w ithin the country, at the regional and international level) and other actions described under the N B SA P them es in G roup 3; ¾ Law enforcem ent is of fundam ental im portance to stop illegal activities such as illegal logging Cambodia Biodiversity Target

Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

179

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

and fishing m ethods; ¾ A pply biodiversity-inclusive environm ental im pact assessm ents on all projects, and design and im plem ent m itigation m easures; and ¾ Participation in R ED D + and application of paym ent for ecosystem services and product certification can support the actions identified in the plans. 12.8 Im plem ent the plans; and 12.9 M onitor and evaluate progress and adapt the plans as needed for im proved effectiveness. 13.1 See actions under Strategic O bjective 2 of Them e 15, w ith the support from actions under the other strategic objectives as part of the enabling conditions. 14.1 U pdate N ational B iodiversity Status R eport (N B SR - 2001) to use as input for updating N B SA P. 14.2 U pdate N ational B iodiversity Strategy and A ction Plan (N B SA P-2002) to align w ith G lobal Strategy for B iodiversity 2010-2020 and national circum stances. Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

t 13 (Aichi Target 16 101): By 2015, odia has designated a national focal  and one or more competent national rities for the Nagoya Protocol on Access netic Resources and the Fair and able Sharing of Benefits Arising from Utilization (ABS), and established a ional ABS Clearing-House as part of the ng-house mechanism;  20, Cambodia has developed and is cing a legislation and national policies on s to genetic resources and the fair and able sharing of benefits arising from their ation. ns under Theme 15 on Access and Benefit- ng are relevant for achieving this target

x

R elevant Law

s and policy fram

ew

A B S have been established. x

Education and capacity building pon the N

agoya Protocol on A

B S horganized and im

plem

ented. x

C ase study on A

ccess to G

enetic and the Fair and Equitable SharinB

enefits A

rising from

their U

tiliz(A

B S). t 14 (Aichi Target 17 102): 15, the National Biodiversity Strategy ction Plan (NBSAP) have been updated dopted, and have commenced to be mented effectively. s an overall target for the updated strategy

x

N ational B

iodiversity Strategy anPlan have been updated on tim

e apublished. x

N um ber of national, sub-national sectoral plans in w

hich biodiversi

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

180

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

15.1 Inventory annually and describe ecosystem s that are vulnerable to clim ate change in C am bodia, including in particular coral reefs, and describe factors determ ining vulnerability; 15.2 Identify and assess the im pact of anthropogenic pressures on these vulnerable ecosystem s; 15.3 D evelop plans to reduce these pressures and restore the degraded ecosystem and enhance m anagem ent to build up ecosystem resilience. G eneric m easures are identified essentially under Targets 8, 11 and 12 above, but also under m any other Targets; 15.4 Im plem ent plans; and 15.5 M onitor im pact of m easures taken, evaluate progress and adapt the plans as needed for im proved effectiveness. Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targetsave achieved in 2016

conservation has been integrated.x

The level of participation of all thM

inistries highlighted. x

A ctions taken to dem

onstrate outim plem

entation of N

B SA P. et 15 (Aichi Target 10 103): By 2020, opogenic pressures (pollution, itation, sedim

entation…

) on coral reefs ulnerable ecosystems impacted by te change have been significantly ed. arget goes essentially with strategic tive 1 under Theme 11 on marine and al resources and actions under Themes ter resources), 8 (Biodiversity and climate e), 9 (Forest resources), 11 (Coastal and e resources) and 13 (Agriculture and l production). There are also a lot of co- its in achieving this target with other ts, in particular for the sustainable gement of fisheries and aquaculture (Target  sustainable management of areas under ulture, aquaculture and forestry (Target 5), nable production and consumption (Target  effectively managed protected area system et 8), the reduction of the loss of natural ts (Target 12) and the reduction of ant pressures on ecosystems (Target 16).

x

Location, status and trends of corother ecosystem

s vulnerable to cchange have been determ

ined andannually. x

N um ber of studies on anthropogepressures (including in particular and sedim

entation affecting coraltheir im

pact on vulnerable ecosysx

Plans to address the pressures on ecosystem

s. x

Project subm

itted or funded to adpressures on vulnerable ecosystem restore degraded ecosystem

s and m anagem

ent to build up ecosyste

resilience. x

N um ber of ongoing and/or planneprogram

m es for reducing anthropactivities on coral reef and other vecosystem

s. x

Extent of healthy and/or recoverireefs and other vulnerable ecosysx

N um ber and extent of protected areas/conservation areas coveringreefs and other vulnerable ecosysim pacted by clim

ate change. x

Law

s on m

anagem

ent, exploitatiopollution of ecosystem

s, existing,review

ed or updated, and status o

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

181

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

Bearing in mind that Cambodia is undergoing rapid development and industrial growth, that, as a result, air quality is deteriorating from industrial and handicraft processes as well as fossil fuel combustion, that soils and waters are polluted by chemicals used in agriculture and mining and various types of wastes, and that marine and coastal areas are being degraded from land-based activities as well as from ships, Cambodia can carry out the following activities to meet its target of significantly reducing pollutant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems: 16.1 M ap out areas in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem s that are polluted, docum ent the nature and sources of the pollutants, and assess the levels, im pacts and costs; 16.2 Identify m easures taken, including prom ulgated law s and subdecrees to address the current pollution, assess their effectiveness and identify gaps; 16.3 Form ulate and im plem ent plans for integrated m anagem ent to address current and possible future pollution, taking into account experiences in the country and region, and best practices, draw ing also from treaties ratified by C am bodia and international plans such as the International C onvention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (M A R PO L) and the G lobal Program m e of A ction for the Protection Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targetsenforcem

ent. x

N um ber of people, in particular frepresentatives of the private sectgovernm

ent staff w

ho have receiveducation, training or w

ho have pin aw

areness-raising w

orkshops oreef and environm

ental protectionx

A ssessm

ent reports on public aw

acoral reef protection. t 16 (Aichi Target 8 104): By 2020, tant pressures on terrestrial and aquatic stems are substantially reduced to levels re not detrimental to ecosystem function iodiversity. s under Themes 4 on mining, 5 on onmental Security, 7 on water resources, 11 rine and coastal resources, 17 on industry nd 8 on climate change will support the vement of this target. There are potential gies in implementing this Target activities e activities planned under Targets 5 for nable management of areas under lture, forestry and aquaculture, 6 on nable fisheries and aquaculture, 9 (because ent for ecosystem services will discourage opogenic pressures on ecosystems), 15 for duction of anthropogenic pressures on rable ecosystems impacted by climate e, and 18 for the control and eradication of ve alien species.

x

M ap of polluted areas and studiesdocum

enting the nature, sources lw

ell as the environm

ental/ecologsocioeconom

ic im

pacts of the polx

Studies com

piling the m

easures taddress the current and possible fpollution, including prom

ulgated subdecrees, and their effectivenesx

Plans to address current and posspollutions.

x

Im plem

entation of international tplans having provisions to contropollution.

x

W ater quality standards such as TSuspended Solids (physical), O

xy(chem

ical) are adopted and im

plex

A doption of green m

anagem

ent sand approaches in organizations/ithat are sources of pollutants.

x

Educational program

s on w

ater px

Proportion of agricultural areas w use of pesticides and chem

ical ferx

Proportion of w

ater areas serious

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

182

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

of the M arine Environm ent from Land-based A ctivities. It should be noted that actions identified for the achievem ent of other targets, such as actions for sustainable production and consum ption are applicable here; for exam ple, industrial pollution can be controlled by using cleaner production. O rganic agriculture can solve to som e extent the question of excessive chem ical input in m odern agriculture. R ecycling can reduce the am ount of industrial or dom estic w astes. Perverse subsidies leading to excess nutrient use in agricultural lands can be rem oved; 16.4 Prioritize interventions on the basis of their im pact, feasibility and cost; 16.5 Put in place m echanism s for m onitoring pollution against agreed guidelines and adopted national standards, and the effectiveness of m easures taken; 16.6 D evelop and carry out com m unication, education and aw areness-raising program m es; 16.7 Strengthen hum an and technological capacity, and institutional structures, including in particular the facilities 105 under M O E established to control pollution; and 16.8 M obilize the necessary funds from diverse sources. Building on the guidance provided in various CBD COP decisions on Article 8(j) and related provisions, and also building on actions being carried out under various strategic themes, in particular theme 16 and 19, 17.1 D evelop and strengthen national level strategies, including sui generis system s, for prom oting and protecting traditional know ledge and the custom ary sustainable use of biological diversity, taking into account the standards adopted by the C B D C O P including the A kw é: K on G uidelines for Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

polluted. x

Proportion of fish stocks contam

iPersistent O

rganic Pollutants (PO heavy m

etals. x

Proportion of untreated w

astew

atdisposed into the coast and oceanx

Proportion of industries includingw ith environm

ental policy adopted x

A m ount of w

astes an hazardous w generated. x

A rea of land contam

inated by hazw aste (hectare) x

A ssessm

ent reports on changing bof people in usage, storage and m

anagem

ent of solid w

aste and w w ater. x

Pollution m

onitoring reports (inclnitrogen deposition, w

astes etc.) a

practices. x

Strengthening of M

O E D

epartm

echarge of pollution control. t 17 (Aichi Target 18 106): By 2020, the ional knowledge, innovations and ices of indigenous ethnic minorities and communities relevant for the rvation and sustainable use of versity, and their customary use of ical resources, are espected, subject to national legislation nd relevant international obligations, and ully integrated and reflected in the

x

R ights, traditional know

ledge andcustom

ary usage of biodiversity hw

ritten in national policy on IndigEthnic M

inorities and local com

m

D evelopm

ent. x

Law

s relating to the respect of traknow

ledge, innovations and pracindigenous ethnic m

inorities and com

m unities are being enforced bnational and sub-national levels.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

183

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

Environm ental A ssessm ent, the C ode of Ethical C onduct; 17.2 Strengthen capacity building initiatives to foster effective participation of indigenous ethnic m inorities and local com m unities in the im plem entation of the C B D , in particular A rticles 8(j), 10(c) and related provisions, and the N B SA P w henever relevant traditional know ledge, innovation and practices are required; and 17.3 Strengthen capacities for the im plem entation of A rticles 8(j), 10(c) and related provisions under the C B D , including for co-m anaging protected areas and conservation areas. Bearing in mind that: As stated in the 5 th National Report under the CBD, there are undocumented cases of detrimental effects of invasive alien species (IAS) in Cambodia; However, a number of known aggressive invaders have been reported, and According to IUCN 109 , ¾ m any IA S have been introduced into the Low er M ekong B asin (LM B ) region for econom ic and aesthetic reasons, and several others have entered Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targetsplementation of the Convention and the BSAP with the full and effective articipation of these communities, at all elevant levels. arget is linked to Theme 16 on Customary d Traditional knowledge and Theme 19 on unity Participation and other related s such as Theme 20 on awareness-raising. arget is relevant to the overall Strategic tive A and Cambodia Target 1 because ment of the status and trends of biodiversity s value usually includes assessment of the iated traditional knowledge. arget is also cross-cutting under a number er themes 107 and as an essential element of nabling" cluster, required for the vement of other Cambodia Biodiversity ts. Indigenous and local communities have acknowledged as key partners in achieving als of the CBD and other biodiversity- d conventions, and their knowledge, ations and practices are essential for the nable management of biodiversity.  the broad nature of this target, progress ds its fulfillment will contribute to several targets, in particular targets 4, 5, 6, 8, 13 and 15.

x

N um ber of local com

m unities andindigenous ethnic m

inorities invoplanning processes. x

N um ber of certified traditional prx

C hildren from

local com

m unitiesindigenous ethnic m

inorities haveprovided w

ith at least prim

ary ansecondary education. x

Local com

m unities and indigenoum

inorities have opportunities to rrelevant professional training acctheir needs and locations.

x

C ulture of local com

m unities andindigenous ethnic m

inorities is beprotected and conserved. x

The different indigenous cultural have been or are being identified.x

Local com

m unities and indigenoum

inorities have been provided legto ow

n and use their lands. et 18 (Aichi Target 9 108): By 2020, major ive alien species (IAS) and their pathways been identified and prioritized, and the itized IAS and pathways are controlled. arget is a cross-cutting issue particularly nt to Themes 1, 2, 9 to 13. It is important to hat ecosystem degradation and climate e impacts are particularly favorable to the

x

N um ber of studies and program

m m onitor potentially invasive alienpresent in C

am bodia x

N um ber of invasive aliens specieidentified.

x

N um ber of invasive aliens speciew

hich pathw

ays have been descriw ell as factors facilitating their

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

184

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

accidentally; ¾ at present, the m ajor pathw ays for introduction of IA S in the region include aquaculture developm ent, horticulture, aquarium s and ornam ental fish trades, bearing in m ind that other pathw ays include m ariculture, agriculture, forest plantation, transport system s (e.g. ship ballast w ater, fouling on the hulls of ships and other boats, transport of raw goods such as tim ber), and tourists; ¾ the spread of IA S in the region has been aggravated by developm ent activities such as construction of dam s, w ater stream diversions, urbanization, agricultural expansion, Cambodia will undertake the following actions to achieve the target by preventing the introduction, spread and establishment of IAS: 18.1 M onitor the behavior of potential IA S and set a m echanism in place for this m onitoring; 18.2 M onitor the know n pathw ays for introduction of possible IA S in the LM B region (in particular trade of species introduced for aquaculture, horticulture and as pets); 18.3 R einforce the quarantine services at borders and regional cooperation and coordination to ensure that effective m echanism s are in place for inspection at borders, rapid detection and enforcem ent of quarantine regulations, so as to prevent introduction of invasive alien species; 18.4 D evelop and dissem inate national policies on the m anagem ent and prevention of IA S, building on existing legal fram ew orks and ongoing w ork in the context of the C B D and other international and regional agreem ents 110 ratified by C am bodia; 18.5 D evelop education and aw areness-raising Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targetslishment and spread of invasive alien s. mentation of Target 18 can be in synergy ularly with implementation of activities  Targets 1 (awareness-raising about causes diversity loss), 4 (sustainable management eries and aquaculture), 5 (sustainable gement of areas under agriculture, forestry quaculture), 6 (ecosystem restoration), 8 cted area system), 10 (protection of tened species), 11(ecosystem restoration and nce), 12 (reducing the rate of loss of al habitats), and 15 (reducing opogenic pressures including IAS on rable ecosystems impacted by climate e)

establishm

ent and spread x

Law

s and policy fram

ew orks devthe prevention and control of IA

Senforcem

ent. x

A reas affected by invasive aliens identified.

x

Trends in habitat conversion causIA

S. x

N um ber of invasive aliens specieprogram

s under m

anagem

ent prox

Protection and eradication m

easuIA

S. x

Support given to strengthen quaraservices in the country.

x

M echanism

s in place to boost regcooperation and coordination. x

Popular publications of law

s, regaddressing IA

S issues, and their dissem

ination. x

Education, inform

al training and aw areness-raising m

aterials, and on occasion of training w

orkshopexam

ple. x

A m ount of inform

ation in the clehouse m

echanism

s.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

185

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

program m es for decision-m akers, adm inistrators, researchers, the private sector and the general public, so that inform ed decisions can be taken at every stage about how to lim it introductions and their spread. Education and aw areness-raising m aterials w ill include im pact of IA S on hum an health and socio-econom ies, inform ation on the spread and im pacts of IA S in the LM B , 18.6 Enhance preparedness of the country to face IA S w hen they have been introduced by acquiring the know ledge and technology for halting IA S spreads, e.g. through their containm ent and control of their density and abundance, preventing their reintroduction, m itigating their dam age, eradicating them if they have been introduced and have established, and restoring dam aged ecosystem s; and 18.7 D evelop and im plem ent a financial m obilization plan. 19.1 Im prove the existing C learing-H ouse M echanism and its accessibility to serve at the science-policy interface and facilitate m ore inform ed decision-m aking; and 19.2 Strengthen institutions and research providing data and inform ation on biodiversity (including its associated ecosystem services) values, functions, status and trends, and threats, and the consequences of its loss. Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

et 19 (Aichi Target 19 111): By 2020, an operable and user-friendly information m containing data and information on iversity (including its associated ecosystem ces) values, functions, status and trends, hreats, and the consequences of its loss een established and maintained in the nsible institutions for wide sharing g stakeholders. ities under this target contribute to ically all the strategic objectives

x

N ational biodiversity inform

ationsystem

has been strengthened andoperational. x

C oordination m

echanism

s have bestablished for inform

ation gathesharing am

ong relevant institutionx

B iodiversity status reports have bdeveloped and shared through theH ouse M

echanism

including infoon threats to, and value of, biodivecosystem

s. x

Educational program

s, w

orkshoptraining activities are being carriethe use of inform

ational technolobiodiversity m

anagem

ent. x

The clearing-house m

echanism

casom

e e-m

odules for training on a

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

186

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

Drawing essentially on the Global Plan of Action for the Conservation and Sustainable Utilization of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 113, the Global Plan of Action for Animal Genetic Resources and the Interlaken Declaration 114 and the International Initiative on Biodiversity for Food and Nutrition adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the CBD 115, Cambodia can undertake the following actions to achieve its target on the protection of genetic diversity of cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals, as well as the genetic diversity of their wild relatives: 20.1 Survey and inventory ¾ plant genetic resources for food and agriculture and genetic varieties of other cultivated plants (e.g. ornam ental); and ¾ anim al genetic resources for food and agriculture; 20.2 C ollect the w ild relatives of plant genetic resources including in particular landraces on the verge of extinction, and related scientific inform ation, including traditional know ledge w ith the consent of local com m unities and indigenous ethnic m inorities in accordance w ith national legislation and policies; 20.3 C haracterize and classify ¾ the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and their w ild relatives for m orphological and agronom ic traits, including at the m olecular level if possible, ¾ the genetic diversity of farm ed and dom esticated Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targetsbiodiversity. x

Participation in G

B IF. x

N um ber of people using the C

lea

H ouse M

echanism

. x

Facilities in M

O E are supported tefficient and effective C

H M . et 20 (Aichi Target 13 112): By 2020, the ic diversity of cultivated plants and d and domesticated animals, as well as netic diversity of their wild relatives is cted and conserved in-situ and ex-situ. arget is in line with themes 1 to 3 and 9 to t the other themes are also relevant. It is inked to many other targets, in particular t 1 on raising awareness about the status, s and values of biodiversity components; ts 4 and 5 on sustainable management of stems that include the protection of genetic rces and genetic diversity in those stems; Target 8 on establishment of ively managed protected areas and rvation areas that will protect, particularly ir core areas, representative components of ersity; Target 10 for the protection of tened species and thus the genetic diversity se species; and Target 12 for the reduction  loss of natural habitats where wild relatives etic resources can be found.

x

Lists of (i) plant genetic resourceand agriculture and genetic varietother cultivated plants (e.g. ornam and (ii) anim

al genetic resources and agriculture found in C

am bodx

H erbarium

and collections of seeplanting m

aterials of w

ild relativegenetic resources x

D atabases of traditional plant breanim

al breeders and curators of ecollections x

Plant nurseries, germ

plasm

facilitbotanical and zoological gardens researching protection, conservatgerm

ination, breeding and local gpools.

x

Law

s on G

enetic R

esources (staninternal and external investm

entsx

G erm

ination, transplantation, repand conservation of threatened flospecies, and reproduction of threafauna.

x

N um ber of local genetic pools haestablished.

x

N um ber of relevant national legisand policy fram

ew orks has been

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

187

anim als, and organize the results in user-friendly databases; 20.4 Inventory gene and seed banks existing in the country and in the region; 20.5 U ndertake an inventory of traditional plant breeders, anim al breeders and curators of ex-situ collections, and involve them in the activities identified under this target; 20.6 R eview plans and strategies that are in place to m aintain the plant and anim al genetic diversity for food and agriculture and genetic diversity of other planted species in-situ and ex-situ. 20.7 D evelop and im plem ent plans and policies for ex-situ and in-situ conservation, and for the distribution of germ plasm (seed, tissues etc.). ¾ For in-situ conservation, support farm ers‟ in situ conservation of traditional and local plant varieties, anim al breeds, and efforts to conserve crop w ild relatives. Support farm ers‟ in situ conservation of traditional and local plant varieties, anim al breeds, and efforts to conserve crop w ild relatives; ¾ For ex-situ conservation, expand existing facilities and establish new ones (seed banks, gene banks, botanical and zoological gardens etc.) at the local, provincial and national level for m aintaining, evaluating, docum enting and the distribution of germ plasm . M aintain genetic m aterials in w ays that w ill preserve viability and genetic stability over long periods of tim e and evaluate them regularly. Support collections and exploration for the collection of w ild relatives w ith em phasis on threatened genetic resources. C onsider opportunity of placing som e accession in-trust w ith FA O so that they can be m aintained Cambodia Biodiversity Target

Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

established. x

D evelopm

ent and strengthening ofor using D

N A based m

ethods foidentification and genetic diversitand for parentage, population struecosystem

health studies. x

Plans and policies to support ex-ssitu conservation, in particular coof traditional and local plant varieanim

al breeds; and plans, policiesm

eans to support farm

ers involveactivities x

Support to existing ex-situ facilititheir expansion x

N um ber of taxonom

ists and parataxonom

ists x

N um ber of university research prrelating to the conservation of genresources x

C ollaboration w

ith/agreem

ents w

and C

G IA R centers for the long-t

conservation of selected accessiointernational standards.

x

M arkets created for local w

ild plaanim

als, for rare and threatened pspecies and anim

al breeds and forunderutilized species in w

ays thaprom

ote conservation and sustainof these species.

x

A m ount of seeds and other plantim

aterials. x

B iodiversity-friendly breeding anlaw

s, regulations and standards.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

188

at international standards; 20.8 Enhance the protection of the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and farm ed and dom esticated anim als, as w ell as the genetic diversity of their w ild relatives by ensuring their sustainable use through: ¾ the sustainable use of econom ically valuable local w ild plants and anim als, as an incom e generating activity for local inhabitants; ¾ the m arketing of products from rare and threatened plant species and anim al breeds; ¾ the developm ent and com m ercialization of all varieties, prim arily farm ers‟ varieties/landraces and underutilized species; ¾ seed production and distribution; ¾ prom otion of traditional know ledge and custom ary sustainable uses; and ¾ the establishment and strengthening of national sustainable use policies. 20.9 Enhance the enabling conditions, including by: ¾ fostering collaboration and coordination at the national, regional and international levels with universities and research institutions, and the Consultative Group of International Agricultural Research Centres for examples; ¾ strengthening the national clearing-house mechanism to handle data and information on plant genetic resources for food and agriculture, other plant genetic diversity and animal genetic diversity; ¾ developing and strengthening systems for monitoring; ¾ creating economic incentives for in situ conservation by farmers; Cambodia Biodiversity Target

Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

189

Cambodia Biodiversity Target

¾ developing and strengthening biodiversity-friendly breeding and seed laws, regulations and standards; ¾ strengthening public awareness of the importance of plant and animal genetic resources for food and agriculture and other cultivated plant varieties; and ¾ Mobilizing funds from diverse sources. Specific actions

Indicators of progress toward

achievement of the targets

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

190

ANNEX 1 Indicative list of laws, strategies and plans of relevance to the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan

adopted by Cambodia since 2002

Law, strategy or plan

Relevance to biodiversity Laws

Law on Production and A nim al health

116,

A draft law

on anim

al health and production is expected to be approved by the D

ecem ber 2015 deadline of

Econom ic C om m unity (A

EC ). The law

includes better m

anagem ent of livestock production and health, and protconsum

er health and local breeds to ensure a sustainable livestock production in C

am bodia. http://w w w .cam bodianew

sgazette.com

/2902/livestock-law

-near-approval

Law on the M

anagem ent of Pesticides and Fertilizers

This law

aim s to define the m

anagem ent of all pesticides and fertilizers in the K

ingdom of C am bodia in a w

ay that rpossible risks from

their uses for food security, food safety, public health, and the sustainability of environm

ent; To public aw

areness (A

rticles 1 and 2) https://view

.officeapps.live.com

/op/view

.aspx?src=http%

3A % 2F% 2Fw w w .w orldsbestrice.biz%

2FLaw % 2520on%

2em ent% 2520of%

2520pesticides%

2520and%

2520fertilizers%

2520Eng.doc

Law on Tourism

The purpose of this law

is: G overn the developm

ent of the tourism

sector in a sustainable m

anner, effecqualitatively, w

ith a view

of reducing poverty; protect and conserve the natural resources, culture and custom

s, w hicthe foundation of the tourism

sector; m

inim ize the negative im

pacts of the tourism

sector, w

hile m axim izing thim pacts (A

rticle 2). http://w w w .tourism cam bodia.org/cam

tourism law /index.php

Protected A

reas Law

The objectives of this law

are to ensure the m

anagem ent, conservation of biodiversity, and sustainable use of naturain protected areas (A

rticle 1). http://w w w .cam bodiainvestm

ent.gov.kh/law

-on-nature-protection-area-protected-areas-law

_080104_080104.htm

l

Law on B iosafety

[… ] Prevent adverse im

pact on the conservation of biodiversity and natural resources in the K

ingdom of C am bodiathe transboundary m

ovem ent, developm

ent, handling, transfer, use, storage, and release of living m

odified organism from m odern biotechnology; Ensure the effective conservation of biodiversity and the sustainable use of biological resources, taking into accouhum

an health (A

rticle 1). http://w w w .bch-m oe.gov.kh/userfiles/im

age/docum

ent/N ational%

20Law % 20on% 20B iosafety.pdf

Law on Seed M anagem ent and Plant B reeder‟s R

ight

The purpose of this Law

is to m

anage and control the breeding, release for use, production, processing, rdistribution, im

port and export of seeds, and to protect new

plant varieties in the K

ingdom of C am bodia (A

rticle secure the m

anagem ent and sustainable developm

ent of varieties and to encourage the developm

ent thereof

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

191

econom

ic, and environm

ental benefits (A

rticle 2). http://eapvp.org/library/m

em ber/pdf/K

hm er_U

PO V _A ct-Eng-Final.pdf

Law

on A

dm inistrative M anagem

ent of the C apital, Provinces, M unicipalities, D

istricts and K

hans, Royal Kram No. NS/RKM

/0508/017. K ingdom

of C

am bodia

A m ong others, functioning, roles and duties of authorities at the provincial and low

er levels. http://w

w w .cdc-crdb.gov.kh/cdc/tw

g_netw

ork/country_system

s_cam

bodia/strengthening_national_system

s/docum

ereform

/sndd/organic_law

_2008_en.pdf

Law

on W

ater R

esources M anagem

ent of the K ingdom

of C

am bodia

W ater and w

ater resources shall be m

anaged and developed based on an integrated w

ater resources m

anagem

ent (IW principle of Integrated W

ater R

esource M

anagem

ent requires coordinated m

ulti-sectoral w

ater use planning, incneed for conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem

s.

Law

on Fisheries

The purpose is to ensure fisheries and fishery resource m

anagem

ent, enhance aquaculture developm

ent, the m

anaproduction and processing, and prom

ote the livelihood of people in local com

m unities for the social-econenvironm

ental benefits, including the sustainability of the conservation of biodiversity and natural culture heritaK

ingdom

of C

am bodia (A

rticle 1). http://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/cam

82001.pdf

Law

on A

dm inistration of Factory and H andicraft

This law

has provisions on pollution, w

astes, environm

ental safety and the like. http://w

w w .cam

bodiainvestm

ent.gov.kh/law

-on-adm

inistration-of-factory-and-handicraft_060623.htm

l

Sub-D

ecree N

0.79 on C om m unity Forestry

M anagem

ent_031202

A rticle 1: This sub-decree aim

s at determ

ining rules for the establishm

ent, m

anagem

ent and use of com

m unthroughout the K

ingdom

of C

am bodia. http://w

w w .cam

bodiainvestm

ent.gov.kh/sub-decree-79-on-com

m unity-forestry-m

anagem

ent_031202.htm

l

Law

on Forestry

For m

anagem

ent, harvesting, use, developm

ent and conservation of the forests in the K

ingdom

of C

am bodia. The othis law

is to ensure the sustainable m

anagem

ent of these forests for their social, econom

ic and environm

entaincluding conservation of biological diversity and cultural heritage (A

rticle 1). http://w

w w .forestry.gov.kh/D

ocum

ents/Forestry%

20Law

_Eng.pdf

Approaches, strategies and plans

C am bodia C

lim

ate C hange Strategic Plan 2014 - 2023

The R

G C has launched the C

C C SP as a continuation of national policy response, in providing a fram

ew ork for clim responses and guiding the transition to low

-carbon and clim

ate resilient developm

ent. The C

C C SP supporpreparedness in responding to clim

ate risks and disaster m

anagem

ent, and in capitalizing on em

erging opportunitgreen grow

th, m

obilizing clim

ate funds from

bilateral and m

ultilateral sources, and enhancing effective particinternational dialogues and negotiations on clim

ate change, both at regional and global levels.

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

192

N ational Strategic D evelopm

ent Plan update (2009-2013)

The N

ational Strategic D

evelopm

ent Plan (N

SD P) (2009-2013) serves as the „roadm

ap‟ for im

plem

enting the R (explained above) and it aim

s to support the sustainable use of all natural resources in the country. The N

SD P oim portance

of

conserving

C am bodia‟s

unique

natural

heritage

and

biodiversity,

along

w ith

enhancing

envsustainability, sustainable econom

ic grow

th, poverty reduction, and im

provem

ents in the lives of rural com

m addition, the N

SD P sets a national target of 60%

forest cover, 450 approved C

om m unity Forests and reducing dependence by 2013. It also recognizes the im

portance of R

ED

D + and greenhouse gas m

itigation projects in clim

ate

change

(http://w

w w .4cm

r.group.cam

.ac.uk/filecab/redd-law

-project/20140819%

20Introduction%

20to% % 20G

overnance%

20in%

20C

am bodia.pdf).

N ational Forest Program

m e 2010 - 2029

The N

ational Forest Program

m e (N

FP) 2010-2029 aim

s to achieve sustainable forest m

anagem

ent and also to alleviain C

am bodia. Specifically, it identifies objectives and goals in developing and m

anaging forests to im

prove lenvironm

ental services and overall econom

ic developm

ent. Im

portantly, it aim

s to ensure that the m

anageexploitation of forests generates benefits for governm

ent entities, local com

m unities, the private sector and indivi

N FP has aim

s to register 1,000 com

m unity forestry groups nationally, and for com

m unity forest program

m es tom illion hectares by 2030. The N

FP has also identified R

ED

D + as an im

portant source of sustainable forest(http://w

w w .4cm

r.group.cam

.ac.uk/filecab/redd-law

-project/20140819%

20Introduction%

20to%

20R

ED

D -% 20

G overnance%

20in%

20C

am bodia.pdf).

N ational Strategic D evelopm

ent Plan U pdate 2009‐2013 (N SD

P U

pdate, 2009‐ 2013)

C overs all aspects of sustainable developm

ent. A

lso chapters on Enhancem

ent of the A

gricultural Sector I.

A gricultural Productivity and D

iversification; II. Land R

eform

and D

e-M

ining; III. Fisheries R

eform

; and IV

R eform

. A nd C

hapters on capacity building and hum

an resources and on investm

ents. http://w

w w .paris21.org/sites/default/files/C

am bodia_N

SD P_U

pdate_2009-2013-English.pdf

Strategy For A

griculture A nd W

ater 2010-2013

O bjectives: The Strategy is intended to rapidly im

prove food security status and reducing the poverty rates in C

am intended as a national fram

ew ork to guide the planning and program

m ing of interventions for this purpose by cooperating national and international agencies in C

am bodia. The Program

is identified as being instrum

ental for coto achieving the overall developm

ent goal of the N

SD P, w

ith its particular focus on im

proving the institum

anagem

ent capacity of M

A FF and M

O W R A M . A t the sam

e tim

e, the Program

w ill also benefit farm

ers and the asector by providing an effective m

eans of im

proving the success rates of agricultural and w

ater sector program

s, greater

diversity

in

agricultural

production,

and

im proving

the

com

petitiveness

of

the

agricultur(http://w

w w .foodsecurity.gov.kh/node/550).

C am bodia R

ED

D +

N ational R

oadm

ap

The C

am bodia R

ED

D + N

ational R

oadm

ap outlines a national plan for „R

E D D + R

eadiness‟ activities. A

ccording to docum

ent, all forestlands are Public State Property (except forests under indigenous land titles and private forests), atherefore the m

ajority of forest carbon is ow

ned by the State w

ith the forest carbon in private forests belonging to the(http://w

w w .4cm

r.group.cam

.ac.uk/filecab/redd-law

-project/20140819%

20Introduction%

20to%

20R

ED

D - % 20G

overnance%

20in%

20C

am bodia.pdf). http://theredddesk.org/sites/default/files/8_redd_roadm

ap_cam

bodia_v4_0_official_222_5.pdf

The R

ural W

ater Supply,

This Strategy Paper defines the w

ater supply, sanitation and hygiene services to be m

ade available to people living in

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

193

Sanitation and H

ygiene Strategy 2010 - 2025

areas and the institutional arrangem

ents and the financial, hum

an and other resources necessary to sustainably providservices.

The N

ational G

reen G row

th R

oadm

ap 2013-2030

C am bodia w

as the first LD

C in the region to develop a N

ational G

reen G

row

th R

oadm

ap in 2010. The N

ational G

re

R oadm

ap is produced by C

am bodia for furthering developm

ent to benefit the people and conserve and restore the nacapital base to continue econom

ic grow

th w

ithin the lim

its posed by the environm

ental carrying capacity. The R

oadm proposes possible paths for short, m

edium

, and longterm

im

plem

entation of green grow

th in C

am bodia. In doing so w

in-w

in-w

in situations betw

een econom

y, environm

ent and society to show

that econom

ic grow

th, environm

ental sustainability and hum

an w

ell-being can be achieved. A

dopting a holistic approach to developm

ent w

ill help the couim prove resilience and decrease vulnerability to clim

ate change. The N

ational G

reen G

row

th R

oadm

ap focuses on athe follow

ing seven goals: A

ccess to clean w

ater and sanitation, A

ccess to renew

able energy, A

ccess to inform

ation know

ledge, A

ccess to m

eans for better m

obility, A

ccess to finance and investm

ents, A

ccess to food security (agriculnon-chem

ical products, and A

ccess to sustainable landuse. http://w

w w .greengrow

th.org/sites/default/files/pictures/Final%

20D

raft%

20R

oadm

ap%

2C % 20Feb26-2010.pdf

N ational Sustainable D evelopm

ent Strategy

The N

SD S docum

ent provides a conceptual fram

ew ork for form

ulation of the com

prehensive sustainable developm

estrategy for the R

oyal K

ingdom

of C

am bodia. There are sections on Sustainability of the national resources and environm

ent and on sustainable econom

ic sectors ainfrastructure w

ith subsections on Sustainable Land U

se and A

griculture, Sustainable Forestry, Sustainable W

ater R

M anagem

ent, Sustainable Fishery, Sustainable M

ining, Private Sector and Sustainable B

usiness D

evelopm

ent, SustaTourism

, Sustainable Energy, Sustainable W

ater Supply and Sanitation. http://w

w w .rrcap.ait.asia/nsds/uploadedfiles/file/Publication%

202-N

SD S%

20C

am bodia.pdf

D eclaration on Land Policy (2009)

The D

eclaration on Land Policy (2009) focuses on three sub-sectors:18 land adm

inistration, land m

anagem

ent, and ldistribution. The objective of land m

anagem

ent is to ensure m

anagem

ent, protection and use of land and natural resotransparency and efficiency in order to preserve environm

ental sustainability and equitable socio-econom

ic developm rural and urban areas as w

ell as to prevent disputes over land-use by regulating land developm

ent, land conversion, lreadjustm

ent, construction, and resettlem

ent (http://w

w w .4cm

r.group.cam

.ac.uk/filecab/redd-law

- project/20140819%

20Introduction%

20to%

20R

ED

D -% 20G

overnance%

20in%

20C

am bodia.pdf).

The R

ectangular Strategy Phase II

The R

ectangular Strategy (R

S)-Phase II (2008-2013) is a national socio-econom

ic developm

ent policy agenda. Thisfocuses on four m

ain com

ponents, including (1) agriculture developm

ent, (2) infrastructure rehabilitation developm

eprivate sector developm

ent and em

ploym

ent creation, and (4) capacity building and hum

an resource developm

ent. Tpriorities for forestry reform

include law

enforcem

ent, effective m

anagem

ent of protected areas, clim

ate change actithe prom

otion of com

m unity forestry program

s. A

lso, the R

S-Phase II contains provisions aim

ing to ensure sustainam

anagem

ent, protect biodiversity and prom

ote com

m unity forestry program

s in the country.

H ealth Strategic Plan 2005-2015 Follow

-up to "H

ealth Strategic Plan 2003-

To address health needs of the population during the eight com

ing years by using the opportunity offered by the R

oyG overnm

ent of C

am bodia to m

axim

um extent possible, as the im

provem

ent in health status of all C

am bodians is recby the R

oyal G

overnm

ent of C

am bodia (R

G C ) as a priority for investing national resources in the social sector.

V ision: "to enhance sustainable development of the health sector for better health and well-being of all Cambodian,

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

194

2007"

of the poor, women and children, thereby contributing to poverty alleviation and socio-economic development." http://w

w w .w pro.w

ho.int/health_services/cam

bodia_nationalhealthplan.pdf

The R

oyal G

overnm

ent of C

am bodia‟s R ectangular Strategy 2009-2013, 117

the R

oyal G

overnm

ent of C

am bodia‟s R

ectangular Strategy 2009-2013, 118w

hich includes: Land R

eform

and D

e-m (D istribution of land, Land m

anagem

ent and utilization including Land registration and tenure security); Fishery R

ef

(Transform

ation of additional fishing lots as fishery conservation areas and com

m unity fishing grounds); and Forest

(Sustainable forest m

anagem

ent policy, Protected A

reas System

, and C

om

m unity forestry). A

focus of the R

ectanguStrategy is on addressing enhancem

ent of the agricultural sector by im

proving productivity and intensifying the agrisector. The strategy states the need to m

axim

ize agricultural production and ensure sustainable use and m

anagem

entresources and m

aintaining biodiversity.

Strategic Fram

ew ork for Food Security and N utrition in C

am bodia 2007-2010 (SFFSN

).

A griculture and agricultural production and productivity. http://s3.am

azonaw

s.com

/zanran_storage/w

w w .foodsecurity.gov.kh/C

ontentPages/2447607584.pdf

The N

ational Strategic D evelopm

ent Plan (N

SD P), 2006- 2010

The N

ational Strategic D

evelopm

ent Plan (N

SD P) 2006-2010 aim

s to ensure that land and natural resources are usedefficient m

anner to support sustainable and equitable socioeconom

ic developm

ent for all C

am bodian citizens. The P

N SD P incorporates the C

am bodia M

illennium

D evelopm

ent G

oals (C

M D G s), form

ulated w

ith U

N support in 2003,in 2005 and published as the C

am bodian M

illennium

D evelopm

ent G

oals R

eport. The N

SD P provides the fram

ew orcom

pass for grow

th, em

ploym

ent, equity and efficiency to reach the C

M D G s.

N ational A

daptation Program

m e of A

ction to

C lim

ate C

hange (N

A PA )

From

http://w

w w .adaptationlearning.net/cam

bodia-napa or http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/khm

01.pdf

The N

A PA identifies priority activities that respond to urgent and im

m ediate needs to adapt to clim

ate change - thosw hich further delay w

ould increase vulnerability and/or costs at a later stage. The Program

m e docum

ent includes: (characteristics of clim

ate hazards in C

am bodia (flood, drought, w

indstorm

, high tide, salt w

ater intrusion and m

alaricoping m

echanism

s to clim

ate hazards and clim

ate change at the grassroots level; (iii) existing program

m es and instarrangem

ents for addressing clim

ate hazards and clim

ate change; and (iv) prioritized adaptation activities to clim

ateand clim

ate change.

Integrated W

ater R esources M

anagem

ent Strategy and R

oadm

aps in C

am bodia

This docum

ent sets out strategic directions for developm

ent of w

ater resources in C

am bodia for the next 20 years. Itintended to lend guidance to sustainable w

ater resource developm

ent and m

anagem

ent in C

am bodia, and is relevant stakeholders. It aim

s to synthesize directions identified in national plans and strategies and add a basin dim

ension, anprom

ote the approach of Integrated W

ater R

esources M

anagem

ent (IW

R M ) w

ithin the B

asin. http://siteresources.w

orldbank.org/IN

TPR

S1/R

esources/C

ountry-Papers-and-JSA

s/cam

bodia_PR

SP2.pdf

The R

ectangular Strategy for G

row

th, Em

ploym

ent, Equity and Efficiency in C

am bodia

"It provides a clear and focused fram

ew ork for the country's socio econom

ic developm

ent and, at the sam

e tim

e, se

Econom

ic Policy A

genda of the Political Platform

of the R

oyal G

overnm

ent in its Third Legislature of the N

ational 2004-08. Founded on good governance, peace, political stability, social order, m

acroeconom

ic stability, partneconom

ic integration, the R

ectangular Strategy focuses on critical developm

ent issues such as the enhancem

National Biodiversity Strategy and Action

195

agricultural sector, rehabilitation and construction of physical infrastructure, private sector developm

ent and em generation, and capacity building and hum

an resource developm

ent. […

] T he N

ational Strategic D

evelopm

ent Planthe operationalization of the R

ectangular Strategy"

C am bodia M

illennium

D evelopm

ent G

oals

"The C

am bodia M

illennium

D evelopm

ent G

oals (C

M D G s) w

ere form

ulated w

ith U

N support in 2003, updated in 20published as the C

am bodian M

illennium

D evelopm

ent G

oals R

eport. The N

SD P provides the fram

ew ork and com

pagrow

th, em

ploym

ent, equity and efficiency to reach the C

M D G s. Each of the nine C

M D G s has been disaggregated iseveral sub-C

M D G s w

ith 25 overall targets and 106 specific targets for 2005, 2010 and 2015." http://w

w w .m op.gov.kh/D

efault.aspx?tabid=156

N ational Poverty R eduction Strategy (N

PR S: 2003-2005)

The Strategy describes the country's m

acroeconom

ic, structural and social policies and program

s to prom

ote grow

threduce poverty, as w

ell as associated external financing needs and m

ajor sources of financing. It is a com

prehensiveoutlining pro-poor actions to im

prove rural livelihoods (including through im

proved access to land, prom

oting agricdevelopm

ent, w

ater resource m

anagem

ent and irrigation and drainage developm

ent, roads and transport, prom

oting opportunities, ensuring better health, nutrition and education outcom

es, and prom

oting sustainable m

anagem

ent andnatural resources and the environm

ent.

ENDNOTES

1 In decision X/2, the Conference of the Parties urged Parties to review, revise and update, as appropriate, their NBSAPs in line with the Strategic Plan

for Biodiversity 2011-2020. In addition, Aichi Biodiversity Target 17 calls for Parties to develop, adopt as a policy instrument, and commence implementing an effective, participatory and updated NBSAP by 2015.

2 Laws, strategies and plans consulted are listed in Annex 1 3 5th National Report

4 Greater Mekong-Economic Analysis of Ecosystem Services, November-2013, WWF 5 See e.g., paragraph 7 of Decision XI/30 of the CBD Conference of the Parties 6 In line with the Royal Government principle of national solidarity 7 From CCCSP

8 NSDP Update 2009-2013 9 MAFF Annual Report 2012-2013 10 National Forest Programme (2010) 11 The Third National Report to CBD (2006) 12 National Ecotourism Policy and Strategic Plan; MOT; SNV and the SRC, USC, 2010 13 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014) 14 See in particular Cambodia Biodiversity Target 8 in Table 29 below. 15 World Bank

16 http://www.unep.org/10yfp/About/tabid/106242/Default.aspx 17http://www.unep.org/resourceefficiency/Portals/24147/scp/marrakech/dialogue/pdf/1_Present_SCP_CAMBODIA_ SAM.pdf 18 from CMDG/Goal 9

19 http://www.wepa-db.net/policies/law/cambodia/02.htm 20 http://www.gmac-cambodia.org/legal/data/Sub_Degree_on_Solid_Waste_Management.pdf 21 Forestry Administration, 2007 and 2010 22 http://www.fadinap.org/cambodia 23 The Fifth National Report under the CBD (2014) 24 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014) 25 NSDP Update 2009-2013 26 http://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/cam82965.pdf 27 http://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/cam85864.pdf 28 The Fourth National Report to CBD (2010) 29 Sub-decree on Community Fisheries (2005) 30 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014) 31 Fourth National Report to CBD 32 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014) 33 NSDP Update 2009-2013 34 MAFF Annual Report 2009-2013 35 The Third National Report to CBD (2006) 36 Also see MAFF strategic goals 37 Text essentially from CBD 38 An account of these instruments and tools are accessible at http://www.cbd.int/abs/instruments/default.shtml 39 Article 5 on "Cooperation"; Article 7 on "Identification and Monitoring"; Article 8 on "In-situ Conservation", in particular Article 8(j) with its

provision to encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the utilization of knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity; Article 9 on "Ex-situ Conservation"; Article 10 on "Sustainable Use of Components of Biological Diversity"; Article 11 on "Incentive Measures"; Article 12 on "Research and Training"; Article 13 on "Public Education and Awareness"; Article 16 on "Access to and Transfer of Technology"; Article 17 on "Exchange of Information"; Article 18 on "Technical and Scientific Cooperation"; and Article 19 on "Handling of Biotechnology and Distribution of its Benefits" (particularly in its paragraphs 1 and 2); Articles 20 and 21 on financial resources and financial mechanism respectively.

40 UNEP/CBD/NP/COP-MOP/1/L.6 41 UNEP/CBD/NP/COP-MOP/1/L.7 42 http://satoyama-initiative.org/en/ 43 Indicators: http://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/tk/wg8j-08/official/wg8j-08-09-en.pdf 44 UNEP/CBD/COP/12/L.7

45 Mainly drawn from the Annex to document UNEP/CBD/COP/12/5 46 http://www.cbd.int/ecosystem/ 47 http://www.cbd.int/sustainable/addis.shtml 48 UNEP 2011, Manufacturing - Investing in energy and resource efficiency. Green Economy Report 49 Rio + 20 and manufacturing and green industries (from

http://unep.org/greeneconomy/Portals/88/GETReport/pdf/Chapitre%205%20Manufacturing.pdf) 50 The Training Manual on Risk Assessment and Risk Management was developed and published in December 2008 as part of technical assistance

project facilitated by the UNEP and financed by the GEF through a project on Cambodia 51 National Law on Biosafety (2008): the objective of this law is to prevent adverse impact on the conservation of biodiversity and natural resources in

the Kingdom of Cambodia caused by the transboundary movement, development, handling, transfer, use, storage, and release of LMOs resulting from modern biotechnology

52www.cambodiabiosafety.org

53 In Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 54 Projection from Cambodia Climate Change Strategic Plan 55 See Green Growth Roadmap 56 See Green Growth Roadmap 57 Cambodia acceded to the Supplementary Protocol on Aug 30, 2013 58 COP 12 request in decision on tourism 59 developed under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD COP decision VIII/28) 60 E.g. http://www.cbd.int/doc/publications/ecotour-brochure-en.pdf 61 E.g. http://www.treeseedfa.org/uploaddocuments/CapacityNeedsassessment.pdf 62 See http://www.cbd.int/financial/doc/id482-se-asia-financial-planning-en.pdf 63 Fifth National Report

64 The Fifth National Report to CBD (2014) 65 As described in the Green Growth Roadmap, eco‐villages are urban or rural communities of people, who strive to integrate a supportive social

environment with a low‐impact way of life. To achieve this, they integrate various aspects of ecological design, permaculture, ecological building, green production, alternative energy, community building practices, and much more 66 Fourth National Report to CBD.

67 The Fourth National Report to CBD (2010) 68 http://www.tematea.org/ 69 http://www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/document.765.aspx.pdf and http://ipbes.net/ 70 Under the Convention on Biological Diversity. Decisions V/6 and VII/11 71 based on http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Landscape 72 From the Satoyama Initiative accessible at http://satoyama-initiative.org/en 73 http://www.blm.gov/wo/st/en/prog/more/Landscape_Approach/landscapequestions.html 74 Aichi Target 1: By 2020, at the latest, people are aware of the values of biodiversity and the steps they can take to conserve and use it sustainably. 75 Aichi Target 20: By 2020, at the latest, the mobilization of financial resources for effectively implementing the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-

2020 from all sources, and in accordance with the consolidated and agreed process in the Strategy for Resource Mobilization, should increase substantially from the current levels. This target will be subject to changes contingent to resource needs assessments to be developed and reported by Parties.

76 Article 32 of the 2008 Protected Areas Law 77 Environment endowment fund Article 19 in the 1996 Law on Environmental Protection and Natural Resource Management 78 Article 62 National Forestry Development Fund in 2002 Law on Forestry. Also see CI‟s experience in setting up the Cardamoms Protected Forest

trust fund 79 By 2020, at the latest, biodiversity values have been integrated into national and local development and poverty reduction strategy and planning

processes and are being incorporated into national accounting, as appropriate, and reporting systems. 80 Decision X/3 of the CBD Conference of the Parties: All Parties provided with adequate financial resources, will have, by 2015 assessed and/or

evaluated the intrinsic value, ecological, genetic, social economic, scientific, educational, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of biological diversity and its components

81 http://www.greengrowth.org/?q=publication/national-green-growth-roadmap-cambobia#sthash.2XqbfMJ7.dpuf 82 Aichi Target 6: By 2020 all fish and invertebrate stocks and aquatic plants are managed and harvested sustainably, legally and applying ecosystem

based approaches, so that overfishing is avoided, recovery plans and measures are in place for all depleted species, fisheries have no significant adverse impacts on threatened species and vulnerable ecosystems and the impacts of fisheries on stocks, species and ecosystems are within safe ecological limits.

83 For more detailed targets and indicators, see the Strategic Planning Framework for Fisheries: 2010-2019 Cambodia

(http://www.issuelab.org/resource/strategic_planning_framework_for_fisheries_2010_2019_cambodia).Annex1 contains concrete targets, milestones and indicators

84 These could be supported by Asian Species Action Partnership (ASAP) 85 Aichi Target 7: By 2020, areas under agriculture, aquaculture and forestry are managed sustainably, ensuring the conservation of biodiversity. 86 Agriculture is a broad term that encompasses the cultivation of animals, plants, fungi, and other life forms for the purposes of providing food, fibber,

and other products used to sustain life. The variety and variability of animals, plants and microorganisms used in agriculture is an important aspect of biodiversity. However some agricultural practices are also a major cause of biodiversity loss (http://www.cbd.int/doc/strategic-plan/targets/T7-quick-guide-en.pdf).

87 Aquaculture refers to the cultivation of fish, crustaceans, mollusks and aquatic plants. It can occur in both inland water and marine environments.

Aquaculture can be contrasted with commercial fishing which is the harvest of wild aquatic organisms (http://www.cbd.int/doc/strategic-plan/targets/T7-quick-guide-en.pdf).

88 Forestry refers to the interdisciplinary process of establishing, managing, using, and conserving forests and their associated resources. As such,

forestry encompasses not just trees, but the multitude of plants, animals and micro-organisms that inhabit forest areas and the ways in which they are used. Forestry can occur in all types of forests from plantations to primary forests.

89 Aichi Target 14: By 2020, ecosystems that provide essential services, including services related to water, and contribute to health, livelihoods and

well-being, are restored and safeguarded, taking into account the needs of women, indigenous and local communities, and the poor and vulnerable. 90 Aichi Target 4: By 2020, at the latest, Governments, business and stakeholders at all levels have taken steps to achieve or have implemented plans

for sustainable production and consumption and have kept the impacts of use of natural resources well within safe ecological limits. 91Recently, Cambodia was found to have an ecological footprint of 1.0 (2010) and a biological capacity of 0.9 (2010). This means the country has a

deficit of 0.1 (http://11saekre.wordpress.com/2010/11/15/cambodia-ecological-footprint/). 92 The existence, development and application of these incentives is a sign that Government has taken steps. 93 Aichi Target 11: By 2020, at least 17 per cent of terrestrial and inland water, and 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of

particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services, are conserved through effectively and equitably managed, ecologically representative and well-connected systems of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures, and integrated into the wider landscapes and seascapes.

94 http://www.phnompenhpost.com/national/coral-reef-areas-gain-protection-cambodia 95http://www.cbd.int/doc/pa/tools/Making%20Protected%20Areas%20Relevant%20A%20guide%20to%20Integrating%20Protected%20Areas.pdf 96 Aichi Target 3: By 2020, at the latest, incentives, including subsidies, harmful to biodiversity are eliminated, phased out or reformed in order to

minimize or avoid negative impacts, and positive incentives for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity are developed and applied, consistent and in harmony with the Convention and other relevant international obligations, taking into account national socio economic conditions. 97 Aichi Target 12: By 2020 the extinction of known threatened species has been prevented and their conservation status, particularly of those most in

decline, has been improved and sustained 98 Aichi Target 15: By 2020, ecosystem resilience and the contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks has been enhanced, through conservation and

restoration, including restoration of at least 15% of degraded ecosystems, thereby contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to combating desertification.

99 Aichi Target 5: By 2020, the rate of loss of all natural habitats, including forests, is at least halved and where feasible brought close to zero, and

degradation and fragmentation is significantly reduced. 100 Some target for 2029 in the National Forest Programme document 101 Aichi Target 16: By 2015, the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their

Utilization is in force and operational, consistent with national legislation. 102 Aichi Target 17: By 2015 each Party has developed, adopted as a policy instrument, and has commenced implementing an effective, participatory

and updated national biodiversity strategy and action plan. 103 Aichi Target 10: By 2015, the multiple anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs, and other vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate change or

ocean acidification are minimized, so as to maintain their integrity and functioning. 104 Aichi Target 8: By 2020, pollution, including from excess nutrients, has been brought to levels that are not detrimental to ecosystem function and

biodiversity. 105 In 5th National report : MoE has one department responsible for environment pollution control with one Lab for polluted water analysis 106 Aichi Target 18: By 2020, the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities relevant for the conservation

and sustainable use of biodiversity, and their customary use of biological resources, are respected, subject to national legislation and relevant international obligations, and fully integrated and reflected in the implementation of the Convention with the full and effective participation of indigenous and local communities, at all relevant levels.

107 Namely themes 1, 2, 10, 11, 12, 15 and 24 108 Aichi Target 9: By 2020, invasive alien species and pathways are identified and prioritized, priority species are controlled or eradicated, and

measures are in place to manage pathways to prevent their introduction and establishment. 109 http://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/mlb_ias_current_state_of_play.pdf 110 See an indicative list at http://www.cbd.int/invasive/done.shtml 111 Aichi Target 19: By 2020, knowledge, the science base and technologies relating to biodiversity, its values, functioning, status and trends, and the

consequences of its loss, are improved, widely shared and transferred, and applied 112 Aichi Target 13: By 2020, the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and of wild relatives, including other

socio-economically as well as culturally valuable species, is maintained, and strategies have been developed and implemented for minimizing genetic erosion and safeguarding their genetic diversity.

113 www.fao.org/agriculture/crops/core-themes/theme/seeds-pgr/gpa/en/ 114 www.fao.org/docrep/010/a1404e/a1404e00.htm 115 http://www.cbd.int/agro/food-nutrition/elements.shtml 116 http://www.cambodianewsgazette.com/2902/livestock-law-near-approval 117Royal Government of Cambodia‟s Rectangular Strategy 2009-2013 (2004)

Department of Biodiversity

General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development / Ministry of Environment

((c))2016 Department of Biodiversity, General Secretariat of the National Council for Sustainable Development / Ministry of Environment , Kingdom of Cambodia. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without the permission of the copyright holder.