no title

NATION

Council

National

Kingdom of Cambodia Nation Religion King

it;><>(f.~~~~~

Royal Government of Cambodia

National Policy on

Green Growth

Prepared by: National Council on Green Growth

Contents

Page 1. Introduction................................................................................................... 1

2. Vision.......................................................................................................... 1

3. Goal and Objectives....... ........ ... ........ ........ ... ... ...... .................... ......... .......... 1

3.1.Go~.............................................................................................. 1

3. 2. Objectives...... ...... .................................. ...... ...... ....... ......................... 2 4. Strategy....................................................................................................... 2 4.1. International and National Collaboration and Coordination ................... 2 4.2. Study, Research and Data Analysis ....................................................... 2 4.3. Harmonization of Green Growth in the Economy,Society, and Culture 3 4.4. Human Resources Development... ........................................................ 3 4.5. Sustainable Green Technology Development.................................... 4

5. Action Plan..... ..... ... ..... ........ ........... ... ........ ... ...... ... .. ...... ... ....... ....... ............ 4 5.1. Creating Mechanism ................... . 4 5.2. Creating a Legal Framework ... 4 5.3. Financial Support. .. 4 5.4. Human Resources Development 5 5.5. Implementation .......... ............... . 5

6. Monitoring and Evaluation .......................................................................... 5

7. Conclusion....................... .......................................................................... .. 5

Glossary.................................... ................ ......... .......................................... . 6 the Preparation and Functioning of General Secretariat of National Council on Green Growth (NCGG) and the Law on Allowing the Kingdom of Cambodia a Membership to an Agreement on the Establishment on the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI).

Green Growth is stimulating comprehensive integration of the Kingdom of Cambodia into a regional framework and the world that helps contribute maintaining political and macro­ economic stability, especially the economic sector, environment, society, and culture progressing simultaneously towards harmonization, sustainability and balance, as weJl as enhancement of green economic growth, which maintains low carbon emission moving towards a society developed based on low carbon emission serving as a greenhouse reduction measure, climate change adaptation and poverty reduction in line with the RGC's goal to reduce poverty by one percent per year.

More than that, the policy aims at contributing to environment protection, natural resources management, biodiversity and forest conservation, and maintaining quality of soil, water, soil, and air and efficient ecosystem safety, and following the direction of the United Nations on " The Future We Want" that the RGC has been implementing it today in the areas of fishery and forestry sector, economical use of energy and water, renewable energy usage, efficiency of natural resources for the support of people 's livelihood and the implementation of New Action Old Policy on Land in order to keep natural resources for the next generations while at the same time keeping up with national economic development.

Green growth is to strike balance between economic development and environment, society, and culture to reach sustainable development goals.

In order to attract financing assistance flows, green technology, and foreign investors, the RGC issues the National Policy on Green Growth with vision, objective, and goal and action plan as follows:

2. Vision

The national policy is invisaged to strike balance of economic development with environement, society, cultue, and sustainable use of national resources through integration, matching and adaption, as well as harmonization between a green growth principle and national policy.

3.Goal and Objectives

3.1.Goal

The policy aims at enhancing the well-being and livelihood of all people in food security and food safety, Access to development, forest conservation, and mixed resources water, and sustainable land use, Access to renewable energy, and energy efficiency, Access to information and knowledge and skill, Access to better social livelihood sevice meanS and environment, and Access to finance for creation of small medium enterprise and investment associated with green growth;

Enhancing education and training on green growth; Strengthening information exchange, knowledge, good experiences, technology and investment related to green growth;

Stimulating green growth cooperation at a national and subnationallevel, region and the world.

4.Strategy

In order to achieve the above goal and objectives,main strategies are as follows:

4.1. Inter-national and international institionional cooperation and coordination

The National Council on Green Growth with a General Secreteriat as a coordination institution with other relevant ministries/institutions at national and subnational levels, including cooperation with national and international organizations, private sector, and development partners should:

Reviewing all national policies by cooperating with the ministries/institutions to achieve economic development while simultanoeusly protecting environment, natural resources management, social progress, and uphold of national cultural identity; Strengthening an implementation mechanism related to green growth at both national and subnationallevels;

Supporting the investment private sectors for ecological safety, quality of life, and efficiency of green economy that uphold tradition and customs of people and keeping value of human and natural heritages;

Strenthening capacity of inter-national institutions and exchanging experiences with intenational institutions concerned with green growth;

Encouraging public participation in a green growth principle in Cambodia.

4.2. Study, Research, and Data Analysis Providing Capacity building to national and subnational officers to collect, study, research, and analyze data and information, concerning green growth;

Preparing methodologies for collecting, analyzing and interpreting data and infornlation related to green growth;

Studying, researching, and analyzing data aud information related to major development sectors including economy, environment, society, and culture;

Studying, researching, and assessing climate change that pose impacts on economy,

Encourage small medium large enterprises to have production and sustainable use of national resources;

Enhancing and mainstreaming green concepts at all levels, i.e. into institutions, genders, and general public;

Preparing green growth indicators for efficiency and effectiveness of green growth, green economy and blue economy;

Promoting all development activities that cause damage to environement, to shift to a new development paradigm by taking a green gro\Nth principle as a basis to reduce adverse impacts on environment and society posed by the development activities; Defining a greenhouse gas emissi on reduction target, especially carbon dioxide; Creating green village/communce and green community adapting to climate cbange and resi lient to climate;

Preparing methodologies and defining an implementation standard for carbon emission reduction at small medium large enterprises;

Promoting restoration of soil erosion, arid soil, and environmentally sustainable areas through reforestation, forest, fishery and biodiversity conservation, and zoning for conservation and development by balancing with each other;

Enhancing carbon cretdit through interational carbon sale by increasing the forest cover for carbon storage sinks;

Promoting the implementation of 3R Principle, 'Reducting, Reusing and Recycling' for natural resources use effeciency and resi lient to climate.

4.4.Human Resources Development Promoting good governance in green growth; Mainstreaming curriculum on green growth into educational institutions, vocational training schools, and other institutes to increase knowledge in green growth, peple's harmonization with natural resources and nurturing love for green nature for the current generation and the uext generation;

Organizing training courses for short, medium and long term, related to green growth in Cambodia;

Exchanging green growth techniques and training officers, staff on green growth in the frame of the GGG! and Asian and international commtmity, in order to raise awareness of green growth and effecti veness of a green growth principle;

Participating in conferences, plateforrns, workshops, meetings at national and international levels, as well as the United Nations Sustainable Development conferences and those related to green growth;

Preparing workshops, consultation meetings and discussion related to green growth, in cooperation with relevant ministries/institutions, the GGG! organization, the United Nations and development partners;

Preparing and implementing green growth programs to provide and increase green ski lls and profession for officers, ancl stakeholders, which helps stimulate the ach ievement of telecommuniction and transport jobs, green industry and energy jobs and green tourism jobs, into a National Strategic Development Plan;

Updating national economic development, based on a green growth principle.

4.5. Sustainable Green Tecbnology Development Exchanging and transfening technology related to green growth, snch as green environmental and natural resources jobs,water resources and sanitation, food security and food safety, forestry conservation, fishery and biodiversity conservation, sustainable land use, green economy development, blue economy development, green investment, telecommunication and transport jobs, green industry and energy jobs and tourism jobs; Snpporting the private sectors that make investments in green house gas emission reduction technology, environmental pollutant reduction technology, effective energy usage technology, clean development technology and recycling and reusing technology of the used resources;

Encouraging the researchers having invented a new green technology to continue their works.

5.Action Plan

4.1. Creating Mechanism

RGC has established National Council on Green Growth (NCGG) as a direct assistant to the Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) and General Secretariat for Green Growth (GSGG) of the NCGG, as the assistant to the NCGG, with its roles in coordination and consultation with relevant ministries and institutions related to green growth by assisting the RGC in mainstreaming green growth on all developmental areas, in cooperation with national and international organizations and the private sectors.

5.2. Creating a Legal Framework

In this national policy implementation, it is to formulate Law on Green Growth, strategic plans, action plan and programs on green growtb in line witb tbe relevant sectors that identify specific activities and responsibilities of the relevant ministrieslinstitutions and establish a green growth agent team at the local authority, as well as review regulations related to green growth.

5.3. Financial Support

NCGG and the General Secretariat of the NCGG are a mechanism for the preparation of policy preparation, national strategic plan, programs and action plans on green growth, as well as for coordinating with national and international organizations, and monitoring these policies implementation and all payments for the operations process of green growth funded by the growth.

5.5. Implementation Process

All these strategies shall be put into practice for the short, medium and long terms, being consulted and approved by the NCGG to ensure effectiveness of policy implementation, following the RGC's vision.

6. Monitoring and Evaluation

In order to implement this national policy successfully and effectively as expected, and with transparency, the NCGG must have a monitoring and evaluation system aud propose to improve the implementation by focusing on indicators as follows:

Having established and reviewing a legal framework and national institution on green growth and improving the system of identifying mauagement, monitoring and evaluation; Determining and analyzing the sources and reasons lead to no sustainability among economy, environment, society and culture;

Improving and strengthening capacity building of relevant officials of green growth; Setting up a level of education for the public and the private sectors, society, and general public about green growth and encouraging the public at the local levels to be involved in activiti es and dissemination programs on green growth and encouraging them to participate;

Improving green growth at national and subnational levels; Reducing economic developmental activity impacts on economy, society, culture.

7.ConcIusioll

The Royal Government of Cambodia places very high value on green growth to ensure

baJance among economy, environment, society and cnlture. Implementation of Policy on Green Growth is to reduce poverty, increase economic growth, protect environment protection, manage natural resources, advance societial progress and safety and uphold national cultural value.

crop varieties, organic morphological resources ( water, soil, air, geology, nature) for agriculture production and productivity. Green agriculture helps boost green economy, agro-industry, and green-tourism (natural tourism or ecotourism).

Green Telecommunication and Transport refers to infrastmcture, transpoltation means by land, water, air, communication and electricity power channel that enhance green environment, such as railways, buses carrying passengers, watercourses, optic cables, satellite and electricity wires.

Green Growth Principle refers to development having green features and nature to ensure accesses to development, such as green environment jobs and natural resources, water resources jobs, and sanitation, food security, and food safety, sustainable land use, economy and investment jobs, telecommunication and transport jobs, industry and energy jobs, and green tourism jobs.

Green Energy refers to energy efficiency, especially production and use of renewable energy, such as wind energy, solar energy, wave energy, biogas, biomass, biofuel, and hydropower.

Green Flag refers to green flags provided by the relevant ministries and institutions to encourage enlerpreneurs and consumers having protected enviomnent and secured ecological safety, as well as ensuring economic growth and quality of life for people.

Green Tourism refers to tourism development and tourists without any damage to the sustainable green environment and natural resources by keeping natural beauty, ever green natural view and ecosystem, with serious consideration about socioeconomic development and upholding cultural identity through hannonization between development and conservation for the efficiency in the scarce resources use, necessarily to be preserved for the next generation to have natural property for their future.

Green Technology refers to tecbnique system and technology that cause no damage to environment, i.e. greeuhouse gas emission reduction technology, environment toxic pollutants reduction technology, efficient energy use technology, clean development technology for recycling and reusing the used resources.

Green Environment refers to good and clean environment without pollutants through clean development, non-polluting environment, maintaining quality of water, quality of generations.

Green Tax refers to environmental pollution tax, liquid and solid waste release tax and natural resources use tax, all of which arise from developmental activity polluting and causing danger to environment, along with business activity and natural resources use. The tax imposition is to achieve the development goals with environmental sustainability.

Green Investment refers projects or investment activities in green growth, focusing on green technology, economy and finance, green environment and natural resources, water resources and sanitation, food security and food safety, sustainable land use, telecommunication and transport, industry and energy and green tourism.

Blue Economy refers to economic activities from the development of coastline zone, following a green growth principle.

Green Economy refers to development of an economy with efficiency in using natural resources, environmental sustainability, green jobs, green technology and economic reforms with further consideration into green encouragement, including green tax, green fInance, especially green credit and micro-finance, and so on.

Green Finance refers to financial instruments, such as check, share, bond, corporate bond, treasury bill, asset, property, credit and insurance as wel l as financial market which enhances purchase and sale of green products and green services to encourage investments in green agriculture, green industry, green business, green infrastructure and transport, green tourism, green energy, green construction and building, green telecommunication, green development and research, green technique and skill, green design, green workplace, green market, advertisement of green products, sale of green products and services as well as green finance procurement.

Green G.·owth refers to sustainable economy development that will cause no damage to environment, which is based on the least use of natural resources with high yields, energy efficiency, low waste emission, clean development, green maintenance and natural heritage, livelihood improvement to achieve balance of economy development with sustainable sustainability that focus on great interest of whole society.

Sustainable Development refers to development of economy having no damage to environment, based on the minimum use of natural resources with high output, energy efficiency, minimum waste release, clean development, preservation of green nature and