PNG Vol One.indd

Government of Papua New Guinea June 2010

Back to Basics

Strengthened primary health care for all and improved service delivery for the rural majority and urban disadvantaged

Volume 1 Policies and Strategies

National Health Plan 2011-2020

Transforming our health system towards Health Vision 2050

National Health Plan 2011-2020

Strengthened Primary Health Care for All and Improved Service Delivery for the Rural Majority and Urban Disadvantaged

KRA 8

Improve our Preparedness for Disease Outbreaks

and Emerging Population Health Issues to

A ch ie ve

KRA 7 Promote Healthy Lifestyles

KRA 6 Reduce the Burden of Communicable Diseases KRA 5

Improve Maternal Health KRA 4

Improve Child Survival Address Priority Health Outcomes

A H ea lth y an d

Pr os pe ro us

N at io n

Fo r al l, bo th

N ow

an d fo r

Fu tu re

G en er at io ns

Im pr ov e

Se rv ic e

D el iv er y

KRA 1 Improve Service Delivery

KRA 3 Strengthen Health Systems

H ea lth

W or kf or ce

Fi na nc in g

In fo rm at io n (IC T )

In fr as tr uc tu re

D ru g an d

M ed ic al

Su pp lie s

Le ad er sh ip a nd

G ov er na nc e KRA 2 Strengthen Partnerships and Coordination with Stakeholders

Health is Everybody's Business

National Health Plan 2011-2020

Volume 1 Policies and Strategies

Government of Papua New Guinea June 2010

((c)) Government of Papua New Guinea, 2010

Copyright protects this publica on. Except for purposes permi ed by the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Act 2000 of Papua New Guinea, reproduc on, transla on, adapta on, electronic storage, distribu on, importa on, and communica on of this work is prohibited without prior wri en permission. Enquiries should be addressed to the Secretary for Health, Na onal Department of Health, PO Box 807, Waigani NCD, Papua New Guinea, Telephone +675 301 3601 or 301 3602.

The development of this publica on was coordinated by the Na onal Health Plan Secretariat in the Strategic Policy Division of the Na onal Department of Health.

Photographs supplied by the Media and Health Promo on Unit and Strategic Policy Division of the Na onal Department of Health. Original artwork for tle page, watermark, and page borders created for Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 by Mr John Rorosi Jnr.

Edi on: June 2010

Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 (full set): ISBN 978-9980-86-245-7 Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 (CD-ROM version): ISBN 978-9980-86-244-0 Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020: Vol.1 Policies and Strategies: ISBN 978-9980-86-241-9 Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020: Vol.2 (Part A) Reference Data and Na onal Health Pro le: ISBN 978-9980-86-242-6 Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020: Vol.2 (Part B) Reference Data and Na onal Health Pro le: ISBN 978-9980-86-243-3

Government of Papua New Guinea | i

Table of Contents

MESSAGE FROM THE HONOURABLE MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND HIV/AIDS

Health is Everybody's Business iii

FOREWORD FROM THE SECRETARY FOR HEALTH

Transforming Our Health System v

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Together We Must Stand for the Human Face of Development vii

CHAPTER 1

Introduc on 1

Purpose and Role of the Na onal Health Plan 1 Informa on for the Reader 3

CHAPTER 2

Linkages between the Plan and Government of PNG and Interna onal Obliga ons 5

Direc ons from Key Government Documents 5 Kundu Approach: Health Sector Planning within Whole-of-Government Planning 6 Achieving our Interna onal Commitments 7

CHAPTER 3

State of Our Health 9

Overview of our Health Pro le 9 Interna onal Comparisons of Health Performance 9 Current Health Concerns 10 Determinants of Health 13 Health System Performance 14 Addressing the Concerns 16

CHAPTER 4

The Way Forward 17

Priori es for the First Ten Years 19 Speci c Objec ves and Strategies 20 Key Result Area 1: Improve Service Delivery 21 Key Result Area 2: Strengthen Partnerships and Coordina on with Stakeholders 22 Key Result Area 3: Strengthen Health Systems and Governance 23 Key Result Area 4: Improve Child Survival 25 Key Result Area 5: Improve Maternal Health 26 Key Result Area 6: Reduce the Burden of Communicable Diseases 27 Key Result Area 7: Promote Healthy Lifestyles 28 Key Result Area 8: Improve Preparedness for Disease Outbreaks and Emerging Popula on Health Issues 29 Health Vision 2050 - Direc ons for the Next Forty Years 30  ii | Government of Papua New Guinea

CHAPTER 5

Implemen ng the Plan 33

Involvement of Stakeholders 33 Values: The Founda on for Implementa on 34 Roles and Responsibili es of Di erent Levels of the Sector 34 Ongoing Integra on of Health Sector Planning with Whole-of-Government Priori es 35 Accountability and Performance Monitoring 36 Partnerships 37 Risk Management 37 Roll-out of Strategic Implementa on Planning 37

CHAPTER 6

Financing the Health Sector 39

Background 39 Resource Usage 40 Resource Alloca on 41 Resource Mobilisa on 42 Alterna ve Health Care Financing 43

CHAPTER 7

Cost of the Plan 45

Approach 45 Main Capacity Inputs and Service Levels 47 Main Cost Interven on Areas 47

CHAPTER 8

Performance Monitoring Framework 51

Why Monitor and Measure Health Sector Performance? 51 How Do We Measure Performance? 51 Who Receives the Performance Monitoring? 52 How Will It Operate? 52 What Will Be Measured? 52 When Will It Be Measured? 53

ANNEX 1

Development and Consulta on Process for the Plan 56

ANNEX 2

Annual Repor ng Indicators 62

ANNEX 3

Lists 64 Abbrevia ons 64 De ni ons 66 Figures 68

Government of Papua New Guinea | iii

Message from the Honourable Minister for Health and HIV/AIDS

Health is Everybody's Business

The health of our Na on is everybody's business. Our cons tu onal fathers imagined a life for our people that included good health, a good educa on, and economic prosperity for all. Yet a er 35 years of hard work, and funding from many sources, we s ll gure low on the United Na ons Human Development Index ranking. The health of our great Na on is preven ng us achieving our dreams for the future. This is unacceptable to me and to the Government of Papua New Guinea.

On 18 November 2009, the Government of Papua New Guinea embarked on a new way forward and endorsed Vision 2050. This landmark document paves the way to a Na on where every man, woman, and child can live in peace, grow, and be happy. Good health is considered an essen al ingredient to this blueprint for the future. Your Government recognises this cri cal need for good health to enable personal growth and economic prosperity, and has allocated 20% of the available development budget for health services.

But we have a long road to travel. Our health indicators have not improved over the past ten years, and our health system is experiencing challenges it has never before seen. It is unacceptable that women and children con nue to die unnecessarily from treatable causes. It is unacceptable that clinics are not open and don't have the essen al medicines to treat simple condi ons. It is distressing to see the re-emergence of diseases such as cholera, long thought gone from our shores.

The me is now for ac on. The me is now for a new approach. The current system is not e ec vely providing the level of service that we need to meet our targets. This Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 will focus on where the 87% of our popula on reside; it will focus on improving service delivery; it will focus on primary health care; and it will capitalise on opportuni es provided by the wealth under the ground and turn them into improved health services for our people. This plan will renew dedica on to reversing the declining trend in health outcomes. From the introduc on of Community Health Posts at the village level, to world standard hospitals in our country's capital, this plan is the rst step in transforming our health system.

A new plan requires a new vehicle to drive it. The current dual system, with its fragmented roles and func ons, is ine ec ve. We have the ability to turn this around through the implementa on of the Provincial Health Authori es Act 2007, a law aimed at removing impediments and barriers in the delivery of health services. This plan will enable delivery of this key reform to all provinces who desire it.

But we cannot do this alone. Health is everybody's business. We will build on the partnerships already in place with Churches, seek new partners, and work with our Central Agencies, to deliver on the promise of improved service delivery for the rural majority and urban disadvantaged.

Hon. Sasa Zibe MP, Na onal Minister for Health and HIV/AIDS

iv | Government of Papua New Guinea

Health is Everybody's Business

Government of Papua New Guinea | v

Foreword from the Secretary for Health

Transforming our Health System

The Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020, our sixth since independence, is an important roadmap for the PNG Health Sector, as we enter an era of unparalleled economic growth and prosperity. Reversing the trend of our deteriora ng health indicators and achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2020 is central to our vision for a happy, healthy Papua New Guinea.

Our focus must be where the majority of our popula on live, in rural areas and in urban se lements. It is here that the health services to our people are failing; it is here we must dedicate our resources, and it is here we must think di erently to how we have done things in the past.

The PNG Health Sector has embraced the challenge to be the:

Human Face of Development

This plan will transform our health system. Over the next ten years we will see the introduc on of new ini a ves, such as the Community Health Post, rollout of the Provincial Health Authority, and a focus on improving maternal health outcomes.

We will con nue to challenge ourselves and use evidence and research to change our prac ce and apply innova ve approaches to treatment and health management. The sector will establish a Na onal Ins tute for Public Health, which will incorporate Centres for Disease Control and Public Policy dialogue. We will focus on implemen ng appropriate technology to provide be er communica on with our health workers and to gather urgent informa on that will ensure rapid responses to emerging health concerns.

This Plan also provides the blueprint for our compliance with the Paris Declara on on Aid E ec veness and Harmoniza on. I look forward to working with all of our stakeholders, both na onal and interna onal. Working together we will improve the health status of Papua New Guinea.

In summary, in acknowledging our problems and our diversity we want to innovate and transform our health system, by focusing on primary health care, improving service delivery, and by pu ng the human face of development at the centre of our ideas.

I welcome and endorse this Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 as a demonstra on of our commitment to Strengthen Primary Health Care for All, and Improve Service Delivery for the Rural Majority and Urban Disadvantaged. I urge all health workers to commit themselves, work together, and maximise the resources available, both nancial and material, in implemen ng this Plan.

God bless our beau ful country, Papua New Guinea.

Dr Clement Malau, Secretary for Health

vi | Government of Papua New Guinea

Health is Everybody's Business

Government of Papua New Guinea | vii

The framers of the Cons tu on of Papua New Guinea expressed a desire for the new na on to witness 'improvement in the level of nutri on and the standard of public health to enable our people to a ain self ful lment.' They saw health as an integral part of human development, and envisioned how a healthier populace would contribute to all facets of life.

Over thirty- ve years later, these dreams have yet to be fully realised. Progress has not been as signi cant or as widespread as hoped. Especially in rural areas, where the overwhelming majority of Papua New Guineans reside, there is an acute awareness of the deteriora on in health service delivery. Women in childbirth die at an alarming rate and our children die unnecessarily of treatable diseases. Volume 2 of this Na onal Health Plan quan es this trend, with reference data and a na onal health pro le. Reversing this decline will test us. However, doing so along with other growing challenges - such as rapid popula on growth, a burgeoning HIV and AIDS epidemic, and newly emerging health threats - will require renewed and sustained commitment from all Papua New Guineans.

Recently our leaders have outlined their Vision 2050 for PNG to 'be a Smart, Wise, Fair, Healthy and Happy Society by 2050'. The PNG Development Strategic Plan (PNG DSP) 2010-2030 has also recently been released and will have an important impact on all sectors. However, the health system cannot by itself achieve the changes that realising these visions and plans will require. Universal educa on is vital for improving health indicators over me, as is the provision of safe water and e ec ve transport infrastructure. Health is a key determinant of economic growth and is essen al to the development agenda. A healthy popula on leads to a more produc ve society.

To realise the PNG Vision 2050 and the PNG DSP 2010-2030, the strategy for the health sector for the next twenty years and forty years is to transform the current health service delivery system. This will include the progressive introduc on of community health posts, district hospitals, regional specialist hospitals, new na onal referral hospitals, and the Na onal Public Health Ins tute, as well as mee ng the requirements of two new provinces. The new referral model is intended to reverse deteriora ng health and the widening accessibility gap. It acknowledges that service delivery improvement is required at all levels, and there is a need for greater integra on between hospital and rural health services (both public and church-managed). The Na onal Health Plan 2011- 2020, directs the health sector improvement for the rst ten years of this longer-term strategy and vision.

The health of the people and health services are in crisis, and together as partners this plan commits us to strategies aimed at achieving our goal of:

Strengthened primary health care for all, and improved service delivery for the rural majority and the urban disadvantaged.

In many ways, the state of our health system requires a 'back to basics' approach in the coming ten years. Strengthening our primary health care approach will be paramount in reversing this country's deteriora ng health indicators. It is essen al that those at the front line of health service delivery are equipped with the necessary facili es, supplies, equipment,

Executive Summary

Together We Must Stand for the Human Face of Development

viii | Government of Papua New Guinea

At the Na onal Health Conference 2009, the Honourable Minister for Health and HIV/AIDS reminded delegates that 'health is everybody's business'. This has never been truer.

and training. The health sector's most important resource, the health sector workforce, works under trying condi ons. Figh ng to improve rural health service delivery means that human resources need to be strategically and e ciently placed, and that there is access to opera onal funding and medical supplies at a health facility level.

The current state of our system makes it impera ve to cul vate strong, coopera ve, and innova ve partnerships. The already strong links with the churches, which are so vital to health service delivery in this country, can be strengthened further. The health sector will use evidence in its rela onships with central agencies at the na onal level to advocate for further resources for health. The special skills of civil society can also be be er harnessed. Involvement of the private sector in the delivery of health services needs to become commonplace. With increasing urgency, the health sector will work with the government and resource companies to transform the wealth stored under the ground into economic opportunity and health for all of those above it.

Chapter 1

Introduc on

Purpose and Role of the National Health Plan

The Na onal Health Administra on Act 19971 mandates the Na onal Health Plan as the single governing policy document for the health sector. This publica on is the sixth Na onal Health Plan for Papua New Guinea since 1974.

The Na onal Health Plan (NHP) provides the direc on for everyone with a stake in health, both private and public, and within the health sector and in other suppor ng spheres of life in PNG. Consequently, the purpose of the Na onal Health Plan is to de ne the policy direc ons and priority areas for investment within the health sector. In this way it can ensure the e orts of all players (government and nongovernment) combine to reverse deteriora ng health indicators. Growing a healthy na on requires the e orts of everyone.

Following extensive analysis of the current state of health and health services, the direc ons and priori es described within this Na onal Health Plan emphasise a 'back to basics' approach. A focus on the most e cient and evidence-based strategies will be required to meet the needs of the growing popula on, stop further deteriora on, and improve health and health services to an acceptable level. Priori es must be set for investments and development e orts.

The goal of this Plan re ects the need to concentrate on improving primary health care for the rural majority and urban disadvantaged, where the e ects of ill health are most keenly felt. This Na onal Health Plan de nes what needs to be done, in what manner, for which reasons, and by which players, to enable a return to the basics and fundamental improvements to the health system.

Guidance for Health Workers

The rst and foremost partners of the Na onal Health Plan are the professionals working for health: from Community Health Workers to Medical O cers, including government, faith-based organisa ons, and

1 Sec on 4(2).

the private sector. For them, the Plan provides the direc on in their work and determines the objec ves, priori es, and expected results in improving health. The priori es of this NHP are everybody's business. Every health worker can and must take ac on now, within their own role, to par cularly improve the health of mothers and children.

Guidance for Health Managers

While individual health workers and their supervisors can make a great di erence through improved e ciency and e ec veness of health services, even more is required from managers at all levels of health care. For them, the NHP is a guide for detailed planning, for decisions about human and nancial resources, and for improving the components of the health system to make them func on e ec vely. Health services must improve accessibility to health services, and, for example, nd ways to double the number of mothers giving birth in a well-func oning health facility.

Guidance for Decision Makers and Politicians

Major decisions on mobilising and alloca ng resources for health care are made at district, provincial, and na onal levels. Every decision to allocate health funds that deviates from the priori es of the NHP is taking a risk that may increase deaths and illness. Every Kina counts. The commitment and support of poli cians is crucial. As health workers we need to advocate for the priori es iden ed in the Plan and hold poli cians accountable.

Relevance to Communities

This Plan recognises the important role of communi es in improving standards of health. Communi es, villages, and individuals must be empowered to be responsible for their own health. A key to this will be improved collabora on between formal health services and community-led ini a ves. The interface between the community and the community health posts will be strengthened. This Plan will pilot new ini a ves and con nue to support current ini a ves, such as Healthy Islands, that are aimed at preven ng ill health. Health workers and communi es need to work together with a focus on preven ng ill health.

A Plan for All Players in the Health Sector

The key to successful implementa on of the Na onal Health Plan is ownership by all stakeholders of the priori es to take forward.

An extensive process has been undertaken to examine the current state of health and health services within the country, to priori se areas for investment, and to consult on the dra policies and strategies. This process involved representa ves from: Government health services, Church health services, training ins tu ons, NGOs, research ins tutes, development partners, health professional associa ons, central agencies, and other key GoPNG departments, as well as medical specialists, health workers, and managers from all levels of the system.

The consulta on process is described in more detail in Annex 1. The development of the NHP was coordinated by the Na onal Health Plan Secretariat in the Strategic Policy Division of the Na onal Department of Health.

Information for the Reader

The Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 has two parts. Volume 1 is the main document and includes the policies and strategies. It discusses and explains what needs to be done to overcome the crisis in health and health services. Volume 2 includes extensive background informa on on health and health services that have been used as evidence in developing the Na onal Health Plan. Available primarily on CD-ROM, it is an important source of informa on, especially for managers and planners in health care at all levels.

Volume 1 consists of 8 chapters. Chapter 2 puts the NHP in a wider context demonstra ng how the NHP takes its direc on from the whole-of-government development plans and from the perspec ve of interna onal commitments.

Chapter 3 analyses the state of health of the people and the factors that determine ill health in the country. It provides the basis to de ne the most important diseases and illnesses - those that cause the heaviest burden to the people and the na on - and the most important determinants of health. They have informed how to focus and target rescue e orts for the health system. Chapter 3 also discusses the health system components, iden fying the major bo lenecks in availability, accessibility, equity, quality, and use of health services. It examines reasons why the previous NHP for 2001-2010 resulted in improved health among some popula on groups and not in most others. This analysis has informed the Na onal Health Plan ac ons for health system strengthening.

Chapter 4 introduces the vision, mission, and goal of the NHP. The main strategies are de ned, on the basis of the analyses in Chapters 2 and 3, to achieve the goal of the Plan. Chapter 5 explains how the process of implemen ng the NHP has been planned and the roles each administra ve level will play. Chapters 6 and 7 present and discuss cos ng of the NHP and nancing op ons. Finally, Chapter 8 talks about the mechanisms and processes to review and monitor the implementa on of the NHP.

Chapter 2

Linkages between the Plan and Government of PNG and Interna onal Obliga ons

The Na onal Health Plan takes its higher level and long-term direc ons from: (i) the overall development plans of PNG Government, and (ii) the interna onal commitments to which the Government has agreed.

Direction from Key Government Documents

The Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 has been developed within the framework provided by key GoPNG policy documents. The Vision 2050 of the Government of PNG describes where we see ourselves as a na on in the next forty years - 'We will be a Smart, Wise, Fair, Healthy and Happy Society by 2050'. This mission recognises the importance of basic services: 'We will be ranked among the top 50 countries in the UN Human Development Index by 2050, crea ng opportuni es for personal and na onal advancement through economic growth, smart innova ve ideas, quality service and ensuring a fair and equitable distribu on of bene ts in a safe and secure environment for all ci zens'.

The PNG Development Strategic Plan (PNG DSP) 2010-2030, developed by the Department of Na onal Planning and Monitoring (DNPM), is linked to and guided by the Na onal Vision 2050. The PNG DSP links the principles and focus areas of the Vision 2050 and provides policy direc on and sector interven ons with clear objec ves, quan ta ve targets, and baseline indicators. Both documents emphasise that long-term planning needs to be embraced to ensure fundamental improvements in service delivery.

As a ten-year document, this Na onal Health Plan covers a shorter me horizon than each of these guiding documents. However, the NHP has been designed to ensure that the health sector is on a course that will ensure the realisa on of the long-term Vision depicted by our leaders, as well as the achievement of the related policy objec ves set out in the PNG DSP. This means that at the comple on of the period covered by this ten-year Plan and the one following it, the key health targets set in the PNG DSP will have been achieved. By the me a further two ten-year Na onal Health Plans are implemented, the health sector will have contributed invaluably to helping make Papua New Guinea a 'Smart, Wise, Fair, Healthy and Happy Society by 2050'.

PNG DSP Key Health Targets National Health Plan Key Result Area

By 2030 increase life expectancy from 56 to 70 KRA 4: Improve Child Survival KRA 5: Improve Maternal Health

KRA 6: Reduce the Burden of Communicable Diseases KRA 7: Promote Healthy Lifestyles

KRA 8: Improve our Preparedness for Disease Outbreaks and Emerging Popul on Health Issues

By 2030 reduce under mortality rate from 75/1,000 to below 20

KRA 4: Improve Child Survival

By 2030 reduce Maternal Mortality Rate from 733 per 100,000 to below 100

KRA 5: Improve Maternal Health Figure 1 Linkages between the NHP and GoPNG Vision 2050 Pillars

Figure 2 Intersection of NHP Objectives with PNG DSP Key Health Targets

2 2006, IBRD/World Bank, Priori es in Health, p.8. Figures 1 and 2 reveal how this Plan re ects the objec ves ar culated in these two key government documents. They also show how this Plan has translated government priori es into achievable health sector ac ons for the next ten years.

Kundu Approach: Health Sector Planning within Whole-of-Government Planning

The Na onal Health Administra on Act 1997 and the new Provincial Health Authori es Act 2007 are the key legal documents underpinning the structure of the PNG health system. They guide rela onships between players at di erent levels in the health system and determine the responsibili es of each. Figure 3 illustrates how this Plan ts into a clear framework. It takes guidance and direc on from long-term na onal level plans, and in turn provides guidance and direc on about the desired shape of the health sector to lower levels of government.

The 'Kundu approach' adopted by the Na onal Government illustrates the importance of ensuring that planning is always linked with the overarching objec ve of improved service delivery. The Provincial and Local-level Services Monitoring Authority (PLLSMA), and the Provincial Coordina on and Monitoring Commi ees (PCMC) will play a lead coordina ng role to ensure that na onal policies are transformed into tangible ac ons at the implementa on stage. Importantly, these

Vision 2050 Seven Pillars National Health Plan Linkages

Human Capital Development, Gender, Youth and People Empowerment

The NHP Vision recognises health as a human right for all: women and men, boys and girls.

Wealth The NHP Vision is for a healthy and prosperous na on for all. health itself contributes to economic growth'2.

Development and Service Delivery KRA 1: Improve Service Delivery KRA 2: Strengthen Partnerships and Coordin on with Stakeholders

KRA 3: Strengthen Health Systems Security and Re ons KRA 8: Improve our Preparedness for Disease Outbreaks and Emerging Popul on Health Issues

Environmental Sustainability and Climate Change KRA 7: Promote Healthy Lifestyles KRA 8: Improve our Preparedness for Disease Outbreaks and

Emerging Popul on Health Issues Spiritual, Cultural and Community Development KRA 7: Promote Healthy Lifestyles Strategic Planning, and Control KRA 3: Strengthen Health Systems

Figure 3 Health Sector Planning within Whole-of-Government Planning bodies will con nue to provide regular interac on for health decision makers to engage with the ac vi es of other sectors.

In the same manner that the Na onal Health Plan derives its character and direc on from Na onal-level policy documents, so Provincial Development Plans and District Development Plans should inform the corresponding health sector planning documents. Figure 3 demonstrates these arrangements. It also clari es which bodies are responsible for developing key health sector planning documents for each level of government or administra on, as well as those poli cal bodies that must screen and approve these plans.

In the implementa on sec on of this Plan (Chapter 5), further detail is provided regarding the role of corporate plans and provincial plans, how these will ow from key whole-of-government medium-term strategies, how implementa on plans will be developed across the sector, and the important contribu on that corporate plans will provide, by de ning how corporate en es in the health sector discharge their corporate and legisla ve responsibili es.

Achieving Our International Commitments

PNG is party to a number of interna onal health ini a ves, conven ons, and trea es, which place certain health and health-related obliga ons on the country. These have also provided direc on in the development of the Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020.

The Millennium Declara on of 2000 assumes primary importance in the achievement of the country's Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) across several sectors, including health. Besides contribu ng to Goal 1 Reduce Poverty and Goal 7 Ensure Environmental Sustainability, the health sector has a signi cant role in achieving Goals 4 to 6, Reduce Child Mortality, Improve Maternal Health, and Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Other Main Infec ous Diseases.

The PNG DSP 2010-2030 links the a ainment of PNG-tailored targets to broad sectoral goals, targets, and expected outcomes. The targets are discussed in connec on with the speci c objec ves and strategies of this NHP in Chapter 4, while the gure below highlights where the health-related goals intersect with the Key Result Areas of this Plan.

Figure 4 Intersections of NHP Objectives with Millennium Development Goals

Other interna onal commitments are also re ected in the NHP, including the WHO Framework Conven on on Tobacco (2005), which addresses tobacco as an addic ve substance and seeks to protect public health (KRA 7). As a member of the World Health Organiza on, PNG has obliga ons under the Interna onal Health Regula ons (IHR), which assist countries to prevent and respond to acute public health threats that have a poten al to cross borders. This has been addressed speci cally as part of KRA 8 Improve Preparedness for Disease Outbreaks and Emerging Popula on Health Issues.

In addi on, the Government of PNG signed an agreement with its development partners in 2008, the Kavieng Declara on on Aid E ec veness, to localise the Paris Declara on on Aid E ec veness of 2005. Progress in the implementa on of this declara on is monitored on a regular basis.

As a party to the Declara on of Commitment on HIV/ AIDS, PNG is obliged to submit annual reports to the UN General Assembly Special Session (UNGASS) on progress in its HIV/AIDS program. Support for this is included as part of KRA 6 Reduce the Burden of Communicable Diseases.

PNG ra ed the Conven on on the Rights of the Child in 1993, which protects children from economic exploita on and performing work that is likely to a ect a child's health, physical, mental, and social development. This also underpins KRA 4 Improve Child Survival.

The Madang Commitment Towards Healthy Islands (2001) emphasises health protec on and health promo on and regional coopera on among the Paci c Island Countries and supports KRA 7 Promote Healthy Lifestyles.

Other global ini a ves that have a signi cant in uence on the health sector include the Global Fund on AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immuniza on (GAVI).

Millennium Development Goals National Health Plan Key Result Area

Goal 1: Reduce Poverty and Hunger ALL Goal 4: Reduce Child Mortality KRA 4: Improve Child Survival Goal 5: Improve Maternal Health KRA 5: Improve Maternal Health Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Other Main

In ec ou Di ea e

KRA 6: Reduce the Burden of Communicable Di ea e

Goal 7: n ure Environmental Su tainability KRA 7: Promote Healthy Life tyle

Chapter 3

State of Our Health

Overview of Our Health Pro le

Papua New Guinea is a unique and special country, and one that has grown rapidly. Since independence from colonial rule in 1975, the popula on has increased steadily to an es mated current popula on of 6.5 million people. With the current trend of popula on increase of 2.7%, by 2030 it is expected to reach 13 million, and to almost double again by 2050.

However, while life in Papua New Guinea o ers many inspiring elements, for many of the people, whether they are part of the 87% who reside in rural villages, or those who dwell in urban centres, there are signi cant challenges. A number of health and social indicators tell a story of hardship, and in spite of its beauty and natural wealth, Papua New Guinea languishes in social disadvantage.

The most recent es mates of mortality show some improvement, and life expectancy at birth con nues to rise. However, the bene ciaries of improvements are not uniform. Maternal deaths are unacceptably high, especially in rural areas and par cularly in the Highlands Region. Neonatal deaths con nue to be sta c, and are of par cular concern in rural areas. Infants have twice the chance of dying before their rst birthday in rural areas than in urban areas.

The health sector has a vital role to play. The sector has the responsibility of assis ng people and communi es to lead healthier lives, and providing suitable and quality health care when it is needed. Papua New Guinea has struggled to achieve this. In spite of the leadership and e orts of so many, from the Aid Posts to the Na onal Department, the evidence shows that a picture of ill health remains, and health services are increasingly inaccessible. There are also new and emerging health threats that may further erode the inadequate capacity of the current system.

International Comparisons of Health Performance

PNG is the largest country of the Paci c region. While classi ed as a 'Lower middle income country'3 , it has a growing economy that is built on its natural resources. The indicators of health status, however, show PNG as

3 This is classi ed on the basis of the country's Gross Domes c Product.

Figure 5 Indicators of PNG Health and Development Status

Figure 6 International Comparisons seriously disadvantaged across a number of measures of health. Several of PNG's health indicators are the lowest performing in the Paci c. Life expectancy is 15 years shorter and maternal mortality 3.5 mes higher in PNG than in Fiji.

Comparison with Lao PDR, a country of similar size, economy, and geographical and cultural constraints, shows some striking similari es with PNG, yet important di erences. While infant and child mortality are similar, life expectancy is nearly 20% longer and maternal mortality clearly lower. These are related to decreasing fer lity and the birth rate in Laos, associated with higher literacy levels. (See Figure 6 below and Volume 2 of this Plan for further interna onal comparisons.)

Current Health Concerns

There is solid evidence that iden es the major health problems, and increasing evidence on the factors that contribute to these concerns. Infec ous disease and maternal and child health concerns account for the greatest burden of disease in the community, and typically the greatest burden on the health services.

Sources: PNG DHS, World Bank, WHO, UNICEF; most recent data quoted.

Indicators 1996 2000 2006

Total (mill ) 5.2 13.2% Total Fe lity Rate (average umber of childre bo alive to a ! " 4.8 4.6 4.4 Crude Birth Rate (births per 1,000 " 34 35 32 I fa # $er 1 year) mortality rate # deaths per 1,000 live births) 69.3 64.0 56.7 Child (1 year-5 year) mortality rate (deaths per 1,000 live births) 25.3 25.0 19.1 & Mortality o (mater deaths per 100,000 live births) 370 733 Life expecta cy at birth (years) 54.0 54.2

Area of data Measure of health and development PNG Lao PDR Fiji Australia

Economy Gross ' Income ($US per person) 1,010 750 3,930 49,350

Demography ! $ o (mi ion) 6 6 0.8 21

Life expe< ncy a bir h (years) 54 65 69 81

Mo a i = Ne Mo a i = > e #$ea @ in <30 $ ys/1,000 ve bir hs) 29 30 10

Infa # $er 1 year) Mo a i = Ra e # $ hs per 1,000 ve bir @ " 57 56 16 5

U $er 5 years M a i y > e #$ea @ per 1,000 ve @ " 75 70 20 4

& Mo a i = > o #! er $ea hs per 100,000 ve @ " 733 660 210 4

Fe i y X Fe y Ra e (average number of <@ $ en born ve o a woman) 4.4 3.5 2.8 1.8

$ Bi @ > e (bir @s per 1,000 " 32 27 21

Z eracy a $ $ < [$ eracy ra e 58% 73%

The main health concern is poor maternal health. Maternal deaths have been increasing in the past ten years. The PNG Millennium Development Goals target for 2015 is to decrease maternal deaths to 274 per 100,000 live births, while it is now about 733.

Under-5 Mortality Rates (WHO 2003 Es mates - Selcted Countries) Australia Bangladesh Indonesia Solomon Islands Vanuatu Samoa Tonga PNG (2006) 0 20 40 60 80 100 Deaths/1,000 Live Births

Figure 7 Mortality Rates for Under-Fives

Infant and Child Mortality Rates PNG: 1996-2006 D ea th s/ 1, 00 0 Li ve B ir th s 100 80 60 40 20 0 IMR U5MR 1996 DHS 2000 Census 2000 DHS

Figure 8 Infant and Child Mortality This ranks PNG as second highest in the world in maternal mortality, a er Afghanistan and outside Sub-Saharan Africa. The main causes of deaths related to pregnancy are prolonged labour and excessive bleeding; a safe and accessible delivery environment could save many lives. The risks for maternal deaths have increased due to the s ll high fer lity levels (many children) and shortened birth intervals over the past decade. Currently, a woman in PNG will have a 25

mes higher chance of dying in her life me as a result of childbirth, compared to those women not giving any birth. The neonatal death rate (within one month of birth), frequently a result of poor maternal health and the delivery environment, has shown li le change over the past decade.

Health of children similarly remains of concern. One child in every 13 born in PNG will die before the age of ve years, a rate far greater than in any other country of the Paci c region. However, the child health program has shown that good program implementa on and improving environmental condi ons can make a di erence - in the ten years from 1996 to 2006, both infant and child mortality rates declined by 20% (see Figure 8). Preventable and treatable diseases, including malaria, pneumonia, diarrhoea, tuberculosis, HIV, and neonatal sepsis remain the most frequent causes of childhood deaths. Adequate space between births provides for greater survival rates of children. An infant born less than two years a er his/her sibling is 85% more likely to die in the rst year of life than if the interval had been three years or more. Infant mortality is also in uenced by family size; children who are fourth born or of higher parity are over 50% more likely to die in infancy.

Besides mothers and children, the urban poor su er from the poorest health status. Anecdotal evidence suggests urban migra on is increasing throughout PNG. The Demographic Health Survey (DHS) in 2006 observed increasing numbers of people living in urban squa er se lements, more people depending on unsafe water sources, and fewer people with access to toilets.

Acute respiratory infec ons or ARI (in par cular, pneumonia) take a high toll. They are the leading cause of hospitalisa on, and besides neonatal condi ons the leading cause of deaths in health facili es (see Figure 9). In 2008, there were about 240,000 children under the age of ve who sought treatment for ARI. The introduc on of the Hib vaccine and opportuni es for improved treatments (for example, access to oxygena on) provide strong grounds for op mism that substan al health improvements can be made.

Leading Causes of Admissions 2008 pneumonia/ARI malaria and other... accidents and injury obstetric and... perinatal condi ons diarrhoeal and... 0 100 200 300 400 Admissions/100,000 Popula on

Figure 9 Admissions

Malaria remains an intractable problem in PNG, and is the second most common cause of admission to hospital. It a ects all age groups, but is most lethal in children, and with serious consequences in pregnancy. There are some signs of hope. The malaria program has received more funds and the incidence of malaria has steadily declined in the past ten years. Further gains can be expected with recent preven on and new treatment programs. Malaria and acute respiratory tract infec ons (in par cular, pneumonia), are the two leading diseases in PNG.

Tuberculosis is again of increasing concern. With the excep on of obstetric cases, tuberculosis now consumes 13% of hospital bed days, more than any other illness. These concerns are further fuelled by increasing evidence of mul -drug resistance and the co-existence of HIV, as well as worrying levels of people defaul ng from treatment programs.

The past decade has seen the rapid dissemina on of HIV throughout the country, reaching into every province, and both urban and rural areas. Since 2005, up to 60% of new diagnoses have a ected females (see Figure 12). HIV-related illnesses are now also the most common cause of child mortality.

Injuries are also prevalent and account for 8% of total admissions, and 11% of the total burden of disease in the country. Many of them are believed to be transport or violence related. There is scarce informa on on causes and determinants of injuries and very limited focus on them in the health sector.

Non-communicable diseases (for example, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, chronic respiratory illness and renal disease) occur, but in small numbers to date. Obesity is o en considered a sign of wealth, and is likely to link to excessive consump on of Western foods rather than tradi onal foods. It is expected over the coming decade that non-communicable diseases will become more prevalent as a result of urbanisa on, greater penetra on of energy-rich Western foods and market goods to rural areas, increasing wealth in sub-sectors of the community, and a shi away from tradi onal lifestyles and tradi onal foods. Current hospital data does not yet show evidence of this. Cancer rates have remained the same over the past ten years. However, there is li le capacity for diagnosing cancers, which may cause under-es ma on. There are now more people living beyond the age of 65, which leads to the likelihood of increasing burden of cancers in PNG.

Dependable clean water sources and lack of access to toilets, par cularly in rural areas, creates a situa on where diarrhoea and other enteric diseases may easily spread. Diarrhoea features as one of the leading reasons for both inpa ent and outpa ent visits to health facili es. This burden is further compounded by the risk of epidemic illness. The emergence of cholera in 2009, not seen in the country for nearly 50 years, is

Leading Causes of Outpa ent Visits 2007-2008 Visits/1,000 Popula on malaria skin disease simple cough pneumonia diarrhoea other respiratory accidents 0 50 100 150 200 250

Figure 10 Outpatient Visits

Figure 11 Malaria Admissions

HC and Hospital Admissions for Malaria 6.00 5.00 4.00 3.00 2.00 1.00 0.00A dm is si on /1 ,0 00 P op ul a on 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

HIV Diagnoses by Year in PNG 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 19 87 19 92 19 97 20 02 20 07

Figure 12 HIV Diagnoses indica ve of the risks that exist when safe water and sanita on are not available and basic hygiene, such as hand-washing, is neglected.

Many of the deaths and illnesses in the country can be prevented by having safe water and proper sanita on, proper hygiene prac ces, and balanced nutri on. Improving access to health services, and ensuring the system has the resources, such as medicines, well-performing sta and communica on systems, are all well established as e ec ve ways of improving health.

Determinants of Health

Frequently, ill health is directly or indirectly a result of the physical environment (e.g. nutri on, safe water, and proper houses); the social and economic environment; and also educa on and behavioural choices (e.g. smoking, sexual behaviour, diet and physical ac vity). In addressing health concerns, these 'determinants' must be considered to target strategies appropriately.

Physical environment and urbanisation

Poor quality water and unhygienic or non-existent toilets (where animals, insects, or people can spread infec on through contact with human faeces) increase the risk of gastro-intes nal illness. Surveys of villages and urban centres con rm that a large propor on of the popula on face these risks. Only 46% of rural households have access to a clean water source. As much as 18% of the rural popula on and 5% of the urban popula on have no access to a hygienic toilet.

Crowding in households not only places pressure upon household facili es, but increases the likelihood of transmission of infec on, including skin, gastro-intes nal, and respiratory contagion (including skin diseases, diarrhoea, pneumonia, tuberculosis, and others). Every fourth urban household has nine or more persons living in it, with 5% of urban households having seven or more persons sleeping in one room. This level of crowding in urban households has increased by 20% to 40% over the past decade. Psycho-social concerns arise with urban migra on, due to limited opportuni es and separa on from family and cultural se ngs; there is also an increased risk of trauma and violence-related injury.

Geographical location and access to health services

The majority (87%) of PNG's popula on, however, live in rural se ngs. A lack of quality water and poor sanita on facili es lead to gastro-intes nal illness, among the ve most frequent illnesses in PNG. Access to services is frequently extraordinarily di cult. Nearly a third of all aid posts are closed. Retrieval systems in emergency situa ons are limited. Most villages lack any capacity for telecommunica ons. The rate of unsupervised births at home is more than four

mes those of urban births; immunisa on coverage is lower in rural areas. Child mortality in rural popula ons is double that of urban children. Diarrhoeal disease and acute respiratory infec ons occur at higher incidence.

The PNG popula on is expected to double in the next twenty years, increasing the demand upon health services. Regional di erences in health are large.

The recent DHS shows that the Momase and Highlands regions are most disadvantaged in health status (and in access of health services). Incidence of fever and acute respiratory infec ons are the highest. Deaths of children under the age of 5 years are twice as common in the Highlands than in Southern Region, rela ve to the popula on (see Figure 13).

Education relates to better health

Be er health is strongly correlated with educa on, especially of girls and women. Those with educa on are more likely to access health informa on through mass media, to access health services, and to give birth to their children in a health facility. Childhood mortality rates fall in direct rela onship with greater levels of educa on. More years of educa on of girls results in having the rst child later and correlates with improved spacing between children, which in turn results in improved health of the mother and the children. Higher educa on levels are also linked to greater knowledge of methods and sources of family planning, and with improved care of infants and children.

Early Childhood Mortality Rates NNMR IMR U5MR 100 80 60 40 20 0 ur ba n ru ral so ut he rn hig hla nd s mo ma se isl an ds no ed uc a on gra de s 1 -5 gra de s 6 gra de s 7 +D ea th s/ 1, 00 0 Li ve B ir th s

Figure 13 Childhood Mortality Distribution

Social and cultural transi on in some parts of the society, including shi from subsistence to cash economy, changes in tradi onal values and norms, and deteriora on of social safety nets, con nue to contribute to health concerns, including common sexually transmi ed infec ons and violence. The age of rst intercourse for men, for example, has decreased by 2 years over the past 25 years.

Gender plays an important role in health choices and health outcomes, as well as age, with programs needing to target in accordance with sex and age-speci c risks. More health informa on broken down by sex is essen ally needed.

Personal choice - of diet, physical ac vity, smoking and drinking - all in uence health. There is very limited informa on available to quan fy these risks in PNG. Nutri on is be er known than the others: every third man su ers from anaemia resul ng in lower produc vity. Nutri on of children has improved in the past years. Smoking seems to be increasing as more cigare es are brought across the border from Indonesia. Betel nut chewing with lime is very common, causing oral diseases including cancer.

Health System Performance

Health Sector Reform - Provincial Health Authorities

Over the past decade, successive governments have commi ed to implemen ng reform ini a ves to enable the health sector to reverse the decline in service delivery and health indicators. In 2007 the Parliament of PNG passed the Provincial Health Authori es Act. This landmark amendment enables streamlining of provincial health services to occur by transferring the management of public hospital services and rural health services to one Provincial Health Authority or en ty.

The Act creates the right for provinces to choose to create a single Provincial Health Authority responsible for the management of health service delivery within the Province. This will occur when the Minister and the Provincial Governor agree that provincial health services may be be er delivered under a uni ed system and they enter into a provincial health partnership agreement. Three provinces, Milne Bay, Eastern Highlands, and Western Highlands, signed in 2009 to pilot the implementa on of the Provincial Health Authority. Several other provinces also indicated their inten on to implement these reforms. In 2011 a review of the outcomes of the pilot is expected, and accelera on of the roll-out of the PHA to other provinces.

While the Act does not fundamentally change the responsibili es and accountabili es of each level of government, it does enhance the ability of government to direct nance to priority areas for health service delivery.

Access to Health Services

At the commencement of the current plan, 78% of registered aid posts were open. A er almost nine years this has deteriorated to 71%. This equates to 781 more aid posts closed during the implementa on of the current Na onal Health Plan 2001-2010.

From 2003 to 2008 the general inpa ent bed numbers decreased by 1,328. The na onal trend on the number of outpa ent visits per person to health centres (not aid posts) over the past ve years has also gradually declined. Outreach clinics from health centres to rural remote villages, to provide essen al immunisa on, nutri on monitoring, antenatal care, and family planning, have stalled from an already unacceptably

low level.

Performance of Medical Supplies

Procurement and distribu on of medical supplies and vaccines to health facili es in PNG remains a major challenge for the health sector. The evidence shows that there is a consistent low availability of key medicines.

In 2004, 40% Health Centre kits were introduced to supplement the rou ne supply chain. However, this has not improved the situa on, with 'stock outs' of key medicines (see Figure 15) increasing. Key reforms in the medical supply area to improve procurement and distribu on networks have not gained signi cant trac on.

Na onal Trend - Outreach Clinics Held For Every 1,000 Children Under 5 Years 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 30 25 20 15 10 5 0

Figure 14 Outreach Visits

Provincial transit stores lack adequate facili es and space to store and distribute medicines and vaccines. Poor storage facili es at rural health centres and aid posts are a major concern for safe keeping of drugs, vaccines, and intravenous uids. Health managers lack skills in management of drugs and supplies. The and

illegal sale of medical supplies is common.

Performance of Human Resources

Increasing popula on growth, impacts of new and emerging diseases, and changing pa erns of behaviour leading to more lifestyle-related illness, con nue to outpace the human resource capacity of the health sector to respond e ec vely to the needs of the people.

A picture emerged at the 2008 Human Resources (HR) Forum of an ageing workforce, low on cri cal cadres such as midwives and community health workers, with low wages and insu cient capacity within training facili es to produce the number of health workers needed.

According to the Asia Paci c Alliance for Human Resources for Health 2008, PNG has a ra o of 0.58 health workers (doctors, nurses, and midwives) per 1,000 popula on (2000 data), compared with Fiji at 2.23, and 2.74 for Samoa.

Combined with the declining state of health facili es and the inability of health services to meet the needs of the popula on, these factors have had a signi cant nega ve e ect on the morale of health workers.

As well as the limited numbers of available health workers, those trained in specialist clinical and technical skills are not located where they are supposed to be. For example, the recent pro les produced by NDOH HR branch indicated that over 30% of skilled health professionals were occupying administra ve and management jobs.

Performance of Expenditure in Health

Chronic under-funding of health systems limits the capacity of the health sector to provide adequate services that are of acceptable quality. The World Health Organiza on (WHO) recommends that for a developing country to provide a basic package of essen al health services it must spend at least US$34 per capita per annum. According to the WHO (reports 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009) government per capita expenditure in Papua New Guinea during the same period from 2000 and 2006 ranged between US$21 and US$24, peaking at US$34 in 2005. As an example during the same period, Fiji spent an average of US$94 per capita, peaking at US$148 in 2005. As a propor on of total government expenditures, PNG spent an average of 9.5% on health, with an average of 3.7% of GDP during the same period.

Na onal Economic and Fiscal Commission (NEFC) studies also indicate that while there is some improvement in funding for health, it remains the lowest-funded sector in mee ng the government's Medium Term Development Strategy (MTDS). However, there is some hope for the future with the GoPNG indica ng in the recently released Vision 2050 document that 20% of the development budget will be given to health in the near future.

Overall government per capita expenditure on health in PNG fell way below the recommended US$34. There are challenges in the e ciency of health spending in terms of both alloca on (doing the right things) and technical (doing things right) e ciency. This situa on is compounded by inadequate available resources, especially at the provincial level.

Na onal Trend - % Health Facili es Adequately Stocked with Essen al Medicines 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 60 58 56 54 52 48 46 44

Figure 15 Medical Supplies at Facilities

< 50 Years > 50 Years No Data Current Workforce Age Bracket CHW Nursing HEO MO Support Allied Officer Staff Health 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

Figure 16 Ageing Workforce

The Sector-wide Approach (SWAp)

Since the introduc on of the Health Sector Improvement Program (HSIP) in November 2004, concerns have been expressed about a number of aspects of the SWAp, including weak absorp ve capacity, and the di culty of ge ng resources to provinces and districts, thereby resul ng in limited or no improvement in the health indicators.

During 2010 the review of the current health SWAp arrangements is being undertaken. Through this consulta ve process between key stakeholders in the health sector, it is proposed to develop/ recommend possible adjustments of the health SWAp arrangements.

Information Communication Technology

With one excep on, PNG has an extremely underdeveloped Health ICT infrastructure; the excep on is the PNG health radio network linking around 1,300 facili es across the country.

This is one of the largest such radio networks in the world. Apart from this network there is li le or no ICT connec vity between provinces and Port Moresby, within provinces, or even within hospitals and provincial health o ces. This is in an environment of a very good, though expensive, telephone system and mobile telephone systems that already have wide coverage and are steadily increasing in coverage and reducing costs to the users.

Aside from the nance and payroll systems, the main na onal system is the well-established Na onal Health Informa on System (essen ally a primary care informa on system), and the na onal Discharge

Papua New Guinea 2000 2003 2004 2005 2006

Government expenditures on health as % of total government expenditures

9.9 10.9 10.0 9.6 7.3

Government health expenditures as a % of GDP 4.0 3.4 3.6 4.2 3.2 Government per capita expenditures on health (average exchange rate US$)

21 20 26 34 24

Fiji 2000 2003 2004 2005 2006

Government expenditures on health as % of total government expenditures

10.3 7.8 9.1 9.6 8.4

Government health expenditures as a % of GDP 4.7 3.7 4.6 4.1 3.7 Government per capita expenditures on health (average exchange rate US$)

68 64 92 148 97

Figure 17 Expenditure - International Comparison

Informa on System (an acute care focused pa ent level data collec on).

The geography of PNG makes it suscep ble to further major health risks. While there has been development of communica on systems to all health facili es throughout the country during the past decade, no ca on of and capacity to respond to disease outbreaks remains very limited.

Addressing the Concerns

The current situa on cannot remain. There is an urgent need to address priority health problems, and to ensure that quality services can carry these programs to the villages, health centres, and hospitals throughout the country. The problems of service provision will be exacerbated by growing popula on pressure. The transi onal economy, with its poten al for greater access to cash by Papua New Guinea ci zens, is likely to lead to a 'double burden' health pro le, with persistence of communicable diseases as the dominant health problem, yet a growing burden from non-communicable diseases. This will further challenge the health system.

Sources: WHO Sta s cs Reports (2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009).

The Vision 2050 of the Government of PNG describes where we see ourselves as a na on in the next forty years - 'We will be a Smart, Wise, Fair, Healthy and Happy Society by 2050'. The PNG Development Strategic Plan (PNG DSP) 2010-2030, developed by the Department of Na onal Planning and Monitoring (DNPM), is linked to and guided by the Na onal Vision 2050. Together these two documents challenge the health sector to transform itself and deliver quality services to all people of PNG, by using innova ve and crea ve approaches and striving for interna onal best prac ce.

In response, the health sector has dra ed a comprehensive and arguably ambi ous forty-year strategy - Health Vision 2050. This Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 is the rst of four ten-year plans designed to achieve Health Vision 2050. It outlines the aim of a transformed health care system, delivering improved health for all Papua New Guineans, while con nuing to stand for the Human Face of Development.

The Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 is the single governing policy document for the health sector, from which all players - both private and public, both within the health sector and in other suppor ng spheres of life in Papua New Guinea - take their direc on. Priority areas for investment across all sectors, the minimum suite of health services that must be provided by each level of government, and new areas of reform, are all ar culated within this Plan to ensure the e orts of all players combine to reverse the deteriora ng health indicators in the country. Growing a healthy na on requires the e orts of everyone.

Considering the current state of health in our na on, the Goal of this Na onal Health Plan is to strengthen primary health care for all, and to improve service delivery to the rural majority and urban disadvantaged. The priority strategy of the plan is 'back to basics', with rehabilita on of the founda ons of our primary health care system, focusing on improving maternal health and child survival, and reducing the burden of communicable diseases. This will be enhanced through the implementa on of the Provincial Health Authority reforms, which are expected to roll-out across the country over the next ten years.

Concentra ng our e orts on this goal, will lead to the realisa on of our Vision of a healthy and prosperous na on that upholds human rights and our Chris an and tradi onal values, and ensures:

Affordable, accessible, equitable, and quality health services for all citizens.

Chapter 4

The Way Forward

Our Goal

Strengthened primary health care for all, and improved service delivery for the rural majority and urban disadvantaged.

Our Mission

Improve, transform, and provide quality health services through innova ve approaches suppor ng primary health care and health system development, and good governance at all levels.

Our Vision

A healthy and prosperous na on that upholds human rights and our Chris an and tradi onal values, and ensures:

A ordable, accessible, equitable, and quality health services for all ci zens.

National Health Plan 2011-2020

Health is Everybody's Business

Within the ten years of this NHP, signi cant progress has to be made towards realising the Vision. All partners and actors in the health sector must share the same Mission to: Improve, transform, and provide quality health services through innova ve approaches suppor ng primary health care and health system development, and good governance at all levels.

Essential Values of the Health System

 Accountability: Being accountable to the people for the services we deliver, and being commi ed to learning from experience to improve our performance.

 People focused: Being genuinely concerned that our people receive quality health care and social welfare services, respec ng the dignity of all people, and delivering services in accordance with our cultural values and tradi ons.

 Integrity: Commi ng ourselves to the highest ethical standards in all that we do, and advoca ng and applying best prac ces to the best of our abili es.

 Equity: Striving for an equitable health care that is independent from poli cal decision making, and being fair in all our dealings, irrespec ve of age, gender, ethnicity, religion, and poli cal a lia on.

 Quality: Pursuing innova ve, high quality, and safe outcomes in all facets of our ac vi es and services.

 Diversity: Acknowledging the diverse nature of the country and the unique make-up of each se ng.

 Teamwork: Working in partnership at all levels of the health system with all stakeholders.

Priorities for the First Ten Years

This Plan has been developed in consulta on with relevant stakeholders and seeks to be realis c, a ordable, based on the evidence available to us, and, most importantly, a prac cal and usable Plan. The policy direc ons for the immediate ten years from 2011 to 2020 are centred on rehabilita ng the system we currently have to a level where each facility is fully opera onal, and on improving the ability that individuals have to take responsibility for their own health. This will require a three-pronged approach:

 Targeted investment in improving service delivery to people living in the rural areas and in disadvantaged urban se ngs, including the roll-out of the Provincial Health Authority reforms.

 Reinforcing health services with strong e cient systems for the health workforce, nancing, informa on, medical supplies, leadership, and governance.

Figure 18 Focus Areas of National Health Plan 2011-2020

 Renewed dedica on to reversing the trend of our health indicators. To this e ect, a series of priori sed health outcomes have been agreed for primary a en on, based on those diseases and situa ons that have caused the greatest levels of morbidity and mortality over the previous ten years, as well as on areas that are likely to become threats to the health of our popula on.

In summary, if we improve service delivery and address priority health outcomes and strengthen health systems, we will achieve a healthy and prosperous na onal for all, both now and for future genera ons.

Speci c Objectives and Strategies

To achieve the vision, mission, and goal of the Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020, the sector will focus on the following Key Result Areas:

 Improve Service Delivery

 Strengthen Partnership and Coordina on with

Stakeholders

 Strengthen Health Systems

 Improve Child Survival

 Improve Maternal Health

 Reduce the Burden of Communicable Diseases

 Promote Healthy Lifestyles

 Improve our Preparedness for Disease Outbreaks and Emerging Popula on Health Issues.

These are outlined along with the accompanying objec ves and strategies in the following pages. The objec ves concern all of the levels of health care, and all of those involved. All players should develop their speci c plans to achieve these objec ves.

The list of strategies is not exclusive. Some of the speci c strategies require ac on at the na onal level, while some are the responsibility of provincial, district, or facility level and should be transferred into ac vi es in the respec ve plans. The relevant indicators and targets for each Key Result Area are discussed in Chapter 8 Performance Monitoring Framework.

Objective 1.1

Increased access to quality health services for the rural majority and the urban disadvantaged.

Strategies

1.1.1 Increase the number of outreach services provided in rural areas and for the urban disadvantaged.

1.1.2 Improve the reliability of medical supplies distribu on and management.

1.1.3 Improve availability and use of funding for opera onal ac vi es.

1.1.4 Increase funding for referral transport of pa ents from health posts and health centres.

1.1.5 Establish community health posts with facili es and sta to deliver maternal and child health services, including health promo on ac vi es in areas where they improve accessibility.

1.1.6 When medical doctors will be available, priori se their placement to district hospitals.

1.1.7 Integra on of hospitals and rural health services into a single health authority.

Key Result Area 1: Improve Service Delivery

Objective 1.2 Rehabilitated and strengthened primary health care infrastructure and equipment.

Strategies

1.2.1 Increase the number of ward areas with at least one aid post open and available to deliver services.

1.2.2 Priori se rehabilita on of aid posts, health centres, and district hospitals.

1.2.3 Increase the number of facili es in rural areas and urban se lements that have essen al equipment available in accordance with the Na onal Health Standards, including func oning cold chain, communica ons, and transport.

1.2.4 Gradually rehabilitate essen al sta c plant equipment at district hospitals and health centres, as per Na onal Health Standards.

Objective 1.3 The right health professionals work in the right places, are mo vated, and deliver right (quality) services.

Strategies

1.3.1 Review the distribu on of the current available workforce and priori se to place the right people with the right skills in the right places.

1.3.2 Increase the level of skills of health workers and improve the skills mix so they deliver the right (quality) services.

1.3.3 Increase mo va on of formal and informal health workers through costed and government-approved incen ve schemes (such as housing and uniforms, medical cover, and school subsidies).

1.3.4 Ensure clinical supervision is provided in accordance with the Na onal Health Standards.

1.3.5 Ensure specialists for all provincial hospitals will be available by 2030 as per the Na onal Standards.

Objective 1.4

Hospital infrastructure is rehabilitated.

Strategies

1.4.1 Rehabilitate at least four major provincial hospitals (as regional specialist hospitals) to the approved Minimum Standards by 2030.

1.4.2 Establish a major new referral hospital in PNG by 2020.

Key Result Area 2: Strengthen Partnerships and Coordination with Stakeholders

Objective 2.1 The Na onal Public Private Partnerships Policy is implemented, and innova ve and cost-e ec ve op ons for delivering services introduced.

Strategies

2.1.1 Establish Public-Private Partnerships4 (PPPs) with relevant major mining and agriculture ventures.

2.1.2 Establish health sector monitoring and coordina on mechanisms for PPPs.

Objective 2.2

Expanded partnerships with resource developers, private health care providers, churches, and NGOs in rural (remote) areas and urban se lements.

Strategies

2.2.1 Improve purchaser-provider rela onships between private health care providers, churches, NGOs, and the resource industry.

2.2.2 Increase the use of outsourcing, when relevant, as a means of increasing public-private alliances/ partnerships.

2.2.3 Implement strategies to increase the number of trained health workers through innova ve partnerships, such as private training schools or scholarships.

Objective 2.3

The health sector works collabora vely with all stakeholders to expand the reach of quality health services.

Strategies

2.3.1 Ensure the NDoH is the lead agency in suppor ng the Na onal Health Board to coordinate health development partner support (including NGOs).

2.3.2 Enhance communica on, coopera on, and repor ng coordina on with central agencies and other GoPNG Sectoral Departments, especially with the Departments of Treasury, Planning, Finance, and Provincial and Local Governments.

2.3.3 Engage community-based organisa ons in planning and delivering health services.

2.3.4 Ensure all health service providers are compliant with relevant Acts and accredita on requirements.

Objective 2.4 The health sector coordinates and monitors the implementa on of the Na onal Health Policy.

Strategies

2.4.1 Ensure the health sector maintains the Na onal Health Informa on System within a single opera ng policy.

2.4.2 Ensure all stakeholders receiving Government of Papua New Guinea or health development partner funding provide an annual report, including proposed future programming and expenditure.

2.4.3 Ensure all stakeholders develop and build service delivery infrastructure in accordance with the

Na onal Health Service Delivery Policy and Na onal Health Standards.

4 The PNG Government policy de nes PPP as those with pure capital investments over K50m. The Partnership Policy

Framework (PPF) enables Government to use Civil Society Organisa ons to implement some of its development programs.

Objective 3.1 Improve nancial resource management for health service delivery.

Strategies

3.1.1 Increase incrementally over ten years the overall percentage of GDP available for health services to meet the needs of popula on growth.

3.1.2 Improve e cient and e ec ve use of exis ng nancial resources.

3.1.3 Facilitate an improved ow of funds to where it is needed at the facility levels.

3.1.4 Develop and implement a single Health Sector Funding Plan and Strategy.

3.1.5 Ins tu onalise the Na onal Health Accounts.

3.1.6 Explore opportuni es for alternate health care nancing.

3.2.1 Develop a Na onal Human Resource policy and plan for the health sector.

3.2.2 Build the capacity of training ins tu ons to reduce a ri on rates and provide appropriate cadres of workers for the workforce of the future.

3.2.3 Increase the annual output of quali ed and accredited health workers to meet the needs of popula on growth.

3.2.4 Focus on increasing the numbers of nurses, midwives, and community health workers.

3.2.5 Increase the sta ceilings for cri cal health workers through evidence-based advocacy to central agencies.

3.2.6 Develop and implement a sector-wide human resource informa on system (HRIS) by 2012.

3.2.7 Outsource the management of Laloki for in-service training.

3.2.8 Develop and implement a ordable health sector workforce recruitment and reten on strategies.

Objective 3.3 Medical supply procurement and distribu on services are e cient and accountable.

Strategies

3.3.1 Improve the capacity of the procurement and distribu on systems within the health sector.

3.3.2 Outsource logis cs management and opera ons for the drug supply chain.

3.3.3 Implement 100% kit system for rural facili es un l 2015.

3.3.4 Build the capacity of provinces and districts to implement the pull/demand systems for medical supplies.

3.3.5 Ra onalise the number of area medical stores to two, and build the capacity of the provincial transit stores.

3.3.6 Provide the provinces with delegated authority from the Pharmaceu cals Board to inves gate and prosecute fraud and corrup on in rela on to medical supplies.

Objective 3.4

The health sector proac vely iden es and uses innova ve and evolving ICT solu ons and delivers accurate and mely informa on for planning and decision making.

Strategies

3.4.1 Review, strengthen, and integrate the di erent health sector management informa on systems

3.4.2 Improve capacity of districts to compile, analyse, and use informa on.

3.4.3 Establish by 2020 a common hospital pa ent informa on management system in all provincial hospitals, which is linked to a na onal pa ent master index.

3.4.4 Build the capacity of Provincial Health Informa on O cers and Hospital Medical Records O cers to compile, analyse, and provide quality informa on for district and provincial management.

3.4.5 Build the management capacity of the sector to specify, acquire, implement, and manage major IT systems, both clinical and repor ng.

3.4.6 Implement by 2020 a na onal health sector-wide area network that connects all provincial capitals and

Port Moresby to provide integrated communica on and data services.

Objective 3.5

Improved leadership, governance, and management at all levels of the health system.

Strategies

3.5.1 Ensure all partners and stakeholders develop implementa on plans in line with the single na onal health policy (the Na onal Health Plan) for their legisla ve compliance and repor ng obliga ons.

3.5.2 The Secretary of Health holds na onal and provincial management sta accountable for the delivery of services in accordance with the Na onal Health Administra on Act 1997 and Provincial Health Authori es Act 2007.

3.5.3 Review and strengthen a performance monitoring and evalua on framework, including accountability for use of funds, for all governance and management authori es within the health sector

3.5.4 Strengthen management capabili es at na onal, provincial, district, and health facility levels.

3.5.5 Planning, budgets, expenditure, and management decisions are evidence-based and are linked to health priori es.

3.5.6 Implement whole-of-government reforms, and ini ate health sector reforms, including considera on of a Health Service Commission and a Health Endowment Fund.

3.5.7 Ensure commi ees such as the Na onal Health Board, Audit Commi ee, Professional Registra on Boards, and Pharmaceu cal Board implement quality assurance programs and meet repor ng requirements in compliance with legisla on.

3.5.8 Review and update by 2020 all Acts of Parliament pertaining to health administra on policies.

3.5.9 Review the Provincial Health Authori es Act 2007 by 2012 and plan the roll-out to other provinces.

Objective 3.6 Strengthen health sector management and system capacity across Papua New Guinea.

Strategies

3.6.1 Provide leadership at all stages to develop and implement a health sector capacity development strategy and plan.

Key Result Areas 4-8

The NHP uses the WHO framework for implemen ng primary health care, as iden ed in the World Health Report 2008, as well as the WHO framework for health system strengthening. Together these tools ensure a holis c, mul -sectoral, equitable, and e cient approach to strengthening health systems.

The following Key Result Areas relate to the major health concerns, which are to be focused on improving the health of the na on. It is important to note that the results related to these health outcomes can be achieved only through combining the work with the previous Key Result Areas. Each na onal program will develop a ve-year strategy de ning the strategies and ac ons in more detail, including elements of KRAs 1-3.

Objective 4.1 Increase coverage of childhood immunisa on in all provinces.

Strategies

4.1.1 Ensure every facility, every day, has the capacity to immunise children.

4.1.2 Conduct supplementary immunisa on programs every three years, or more frequently as needed.

Objective 4.2 Reduce case fatality rates for pneumonia in children through accelera on of roll-out of Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) to all provinces.

Strategies

4.2.1 Increase the number of health facili es that have the capacity to implement IMCI.

4.2.2 Increase the percentage of communi es with the capacity to implement IMCI.

4.2.3 Ensure an bio cs are available every day, at every facility, to combat pneumonia in children under ve.

Key Result Area 4: Improve Child Survival

Objective 4.3

Decrease neonatal deaths.

Strategies

4.3.1 Ensure that every facility has the capacity to provide life-saving support to the neonate.

4.3.2 Increase tetanus toxoid coverage of antenatal mothers.

4.3.3 Improve maternal health services, and improve supervised deliveries.

Objective 4.4 Reduce malnutri on (moderate to high) in children under the age of ve years.

Strategies

4.4.1 Advocate and promote exclusive breas_ eeding.

4.4.2 Ensure all babies and children under ve have access to supplementary feeding when and where they require it.

4.4.3 Increase access for mothers and children to micronutrient supplementa on.

Objective 5.1

Increase family planning coverage.

Strategies

5.1.1 Ensure every health facility has the capacity to o er family planning services at all mes.

5.1.2 Advocate for the advantages of having fewer children and increased spacing of children.

5.1.3 Extend the reach of the village health volunteers (VHV) program and community-based distribu on systems.

Objective 5.2 Increase the capacity of the health sector to provide safe and supervised deliveries.

Strategies

5.2.1 Increase the number of facili es capable of providing supervised deliveries.

5.2.2 Increase the numbers of health workers skilled in obstetric care.

5.2.3 Ensure every health facility is capable of providing quality service/support before, during, and a er pregnancy.

5.3.1 Increase the capacity of all facili es to provide essen al EOC.

5.3.2 Increase the number of facili es capable of providing comprehensive obstetric care.

5.3.3 Ensure every maternal death is inves gated and audited, and prac ce improved.

Objective 5.4 Improve sexual and reproduc ve health for adolescents.

Strategies

5.4.1 Increase the knowledge of adolescents about sexual and reproduc ve health.

5.4.2 Increase cross-sectoral collabora on with schools to strengthen educa on of students in sexual and reproduc ve health.

Key Result Area 6: Reduce the Burden of Communicable Diseases

Objective 6.1 Reduce malaria-related morbidity and mortality in Papua New Guinea.

Strategies

6.1.1 Strengthen poli cal commitment for malaria control.

6.1.2 Improve vector control measures, with a priority of all households having access to a long-las ng insec cidal net (LLIN), and a reintroduc on of residual spraying where appropriate.

6.1.3 Maximise access to prompt quality diagnosis and appropriate treatment for malaria.

Objective 6.2 Control tuberculosis (TB) incidence by 2020, with a decline in cases of mul -drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB).

Strategies

6.2.1 Strengthen poli cal commitment for TB control.

6.2.2 Implement a quality and supervised Tuberculosis Directly Observed Treatment, Short-course (TB DOTS) program in every province by 2015.

6.2.3 Ensure a su cient number of quality-assured laboratories are established and func oning e ciently under the coordina on of the Central Public Health Laboratory (CPHL).

6.2.4 Ensure every person who is HIV posi ve has access to TB DOTS.

Objective 6.3

Scale up preven on, treatment, care, and support for sexually transmi ed infec ons (STIs) and HIV to meet universal access targets.

Strategies

6.3.1 Increase access to quality HIV counselling and tes ng services.

6.3.2 Increase access to quality an retroviral (ARV) treatment for adults and children.

6.3.3 Ensure male and female condoms (and lubricants) are available and accessible throughout the country.

6.3.4 Increase access of the general popula on to postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) services.

6.3.5 Ensure every facility is able to provide preven on of parent-to-child transmission (PPTCT) services.

Objective 6.4 Strengthen communicable disease surveillance and monitoring.

Strategies

6.4.1 Introduce an integrated surveillance and monitoring strategy for communicable diseases.

6.4.2 Strengthen epidemic surveillance and response capacity for communicable diseases with a poten al for outbreaks.

6.4.3 Improve access to quality and appropriate rapid diagnos c and laboratory tes ng services at facility, province, and na onal levels.

Objective 7.1

Increase health sector response to preven on of injuries, trauma, and violence with an impact on families and the community.

Strategies

7.1.1 Increase the advocacy for popula on-based health awareness interven ons designed to reduce the number of preventable injuries and trauma.

7.1.2 Increase the roll-out of and access to family support centres to reduce the impact of violence in the home and community.

7.1.3 Increase the capacity of hospital accident and emergency departments to address transport-related injuries.

Objective 7.2

Reduce the number of outbreaks of food and water-borne diseases.

Strategies

7.2.1 Increase the number of households that have access to safe drinking water, and e ec ve waste disposal and sanita on.

Key Result Area 7: Promote Healthy Lifestyles

7.2.2 Ensure all health facili es have access to running water, and e ec ve waste disposal and sanita on.

7.2.3 Ensure public and private buildings comply with legisla on in rela on to water supply, sanita on, and food handling.

7.2.4 Review and improve relevant legisla on to enhance the management and control of rural water supplies.

Objective 7.3

Increase individuals' and communi es' involvement in their own health.

Strategies

7.3.1 Increase the roll-out of the Healthy Islands strategy.

7.3.2 Extend the reach of community-based health care, including enhancing village volunteer programs.

7.3.3 Implement strategies that empower the community and the individual to take ownership and direc on of their health and the health of their families.

Objective 7.4

Reduce morbidity and mortality from non-communicable diseases.

Strategies

7.4.1 Increase the focus on popula on-based health awareness interven ons designed to reduce the impact of substance abuse, increase the level of physical ac vity, and improve diet.

7.4.2 Increase early detec on (screening) and immediate clinical interven ons for non-communicable diseases, such as heart disease, strokes, diabetes, and cancers.

7.4.3 Ensure all government facili es promote healthy lifestyles and schedule healthy workplace ac vi es.

7.4.4 Review and improve legisla on that will support the adop on of healthy lifestyles.

7.4.5 Improve and expand the standards in mental health service delivery.

7.4.6 Improve the provision of disability aids/appliances, physiotherapy, and community-based rehabilita on services.

Key Result Area 8: Improve Preparedness for Disease Outbreaks and Emerging Population Health Issues

Objective 8.1 Increase capacity of the health sector to iden fy, monitor, and report on urgent and emerging health threats.

Strategies

8.1.1 Establish a Na onal Public Health Ins tute, incorpora ng a Centre for Disease Control (including response).

8.1.2 Strengthen surveillance systems for detec ng and responding to epidemics.

8.1.3 Strengthen capacity of the health sector to report on no able diseases in accordance with interna onal regula ons.

8.1.4 Increase the capacity of provinces to coordinate their responses to epidemic and popula on health emergencies.

Objective 8.2 Increase capacity of the Central Public Health Laboratory (CHPL) to provide services to meet urgent and emerging concerns.

Strategies

8.2.1 Ensure the CPHL (including all provincial laboratories) has su cient capacity and supplies at all mes to support a na onal response to disease outbreaks and other emergency health concerns.

8.2.2 Ensure a func oning and safe blood transfusion service is available to the health sector, and includes

HIV blood screening capability.

8.2.3 Ensure the CPHL provides support for clinical diagnosis and public health func ons to provincial laboratories.

Objective 8.3

Improve capacity and preparedness of the health sector to address the impacts of climate change.

Strategies

8.3.1 Increase cross-sectoral collabora on to prepare for impacts of climate change on the health of Papua

New Guineans.

8.3.2 Ensure every health facility has a Disaster Preparedness Plan, including issues associated with climate change.

Objective 8.4

Ensure the health sector works collabora vely to manage popula on health threats related to the growing resources boom.

Strategies

8.4.1 Strengthen the regulatory role of the health sector to reduce the adverse health impact on the popula on of development projects.

8.4.2 Ensure private sector health facili es (mining and agricultural) support na onal surveillance systems.

Health Vision 2050 - Directions for the Next Forty Years

Health Vision 2050 is a forty-year strategy that will transform the current health service delivery system in Papua New Guinea, and links to the Na onal Government's Papua New Guinea Vision 2050 and the PNG Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030. It includes the progressive introduc on of community health posts, district hospitals, regional specialist hospitals, and na onal referral hospitals, and also incorporates the requirements of two new provinces. This new referral model, underpinned by strengthened health systems will create an enabling environment to reverse our deteriora ng health indicators, and to reduce the accessibility gap for our rural majority and for those living in disadvantaged urban se ngs.

The strategy underpinning Health Vision 2050 acknowledges that service delivery improvement is required at all levels of the health care referral model. It further acknowledges the need for greater integra on between hospital and rural health services (both public and church-managed), and seeks to maximise the use of the human and other resources available to the sector. Furthermore, considering the uidity of the popula on at any one me, it is recognised that the rst point of access to the system may be at any level, including hospitals.

Components of Health Vision 2050

Community Health Posts will be the new outer periphery of the health system, sta ed by three health workers skilled in maternal and child health, midwifery, health promo on, and community awareness programs. These facili es will be slightly larger than the current Aid Posts, and di er by the inclusion of a labour room. It is an cipated that supervised deliveries and rou ne immunisa on will be conducted from these points. A new focus for these facili es will be improving the interface between the community and formal health services, ensuring that the community knows how to access the appropriate level of care, as well as equipping them with the necessary skills and knowledge to be er take responsibility for their own healthy living. This la er aspect will be enhanced by encouragement of the use of informal health care from the community and family level, including, for example, Village Health Volunteers.

Health Centres will remain the intermediary referral point between Community Health Posts and District Hospitals, ensuring an accessibility gap does not widen as reforms are introduced.

In accordance with geographical and popula on catchment requirements, District Hospitals will gradually be introduced to most districts, and will each over the forty-year period be progressively sta ed with a doctor. A new Rural Doctor's Program will be developed and implemented by Divine Word University with this opera ng environment in mind. The introduc on of this facility across districts will begin to address the demand for more complex obstetric care at a more local level. Clinical services provided at District Hospitals will include general surgery, maternal and child health, malaria, HIV/AIDS, and TB diagnos cs, as well as health promo on, health improvement, and health protec on.

Provincial Public Hospitals will be progressively rehabilitated and upgraded during the forty-year period. In general, these hospitals will provide, as a minimum, the following clinical services: Internal Medicine, Surgery, Paediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Accident and Emergency, and Anaesthe cs. Health promo on, health improvement, and health protec on services will also be provided. In provinces where the hospital performs a dual role as a specialist regional hospital, addi onal clinical services will be provided as men oned below.

It is proposed that four specialist hospitals be established, with one located in each region within Papua New Guinea. The approach acknowledges the manpower constraints within PNG (speci cally that of specialist medical o cers and specialist nurses) and seeks to maximise access for the popula on to these services through establishing centres of excellence. These Specialist Regional Hospitals will therefore have a mul -faceted role as a na onal specialist hospital (for example, provision of oncology services for the country), as a provincial hospital catering to its individual province, and as a regional hospital catering to the needs for complex treatment of pa ents from its individual region.

Paci c Medical Centre will be developed as a 100% not-for-pro t, state-of-the-art, full-service teaching hospital, to bene t the en re country. It will:

(a) Serve as the na on's centre of excellence in health care, where the world's best prac ces in health care and medicine will be provided and demonstrated to bene t Papua New Guineans, in collabora on with public hospitals and some of the world's leading teaching hospitals.

(b) Serve as the na on's leading referral hospital for urgent and cri cal care needs that are beyond the capacity of any public hospital in PNG.

PMGHP

Provincial Public Hospitals Pr vincial Public spitals

District Hospitals istrict s itals

Health Centres ealt Ce tres

Health Sub-Centres ealt Sub-Centres

Aid Posts id Posts CURRENT STRUCTURE 2010

FUTURE SCENARIO: Health Vision 2050

Na onal Government through Hospital Boards a onal overn ent through ospital oards

Provincial Health Authority Provincial ealth uthority

absorbed

upgraded Na onal Referral Hospital 'Paci c Medical Centre' a al eferral ospital 'Paci c edical Centre'

Provincial Public Hospitals Pr vi cial P lic s itals Regional Specialist Hospitals egional Specialist ospitals

District Hospitals istrict s itals

Health Centres ealth Centres

Community Health Post Co unity ealth Post Community Health Post C unity ealth Post Community Health Post C unity ealth Post

Community and Family Care (to be provided by community and civil society) Co unity and Fa ily Care (to be provided by co unity and civil society)

Governance

(c) Become a centre of excellence in postgraduate and con nuing medical educa on, including professional training aimed at improving the skills of na onal physicians, nurses, hospital administrators, biomedical engineers, and other ancillary sta working in public hospitals in PNG.

(d) Become the na on's centre of excellence in medical research in useful areas of health and medicine, in collabora on with na onal ins tu ons, such as the UPNG School of Medicine and Health Sciences, PNG Ins tute of Medical Research, and other local universi es, including in partnership with par cipa ng university medical centres and hospitals, and other global health care partners in the United States and around the world.

A Na onal Ins tute for Public Health will be established, incorpora ng Centres for Disease Control and Health Policy Management. This facility will provide guidance in policy development and planning for the sector.

The implica ons of Health Vision 2050 for the immediate ten-year period of the Na onal Health Plan 2011-2020 include:

 Rehabilita on of Aid Posts

 Establishment of Community Health Posts and expansion in strategic loca ons

 Rehabilita on of Health Centres

 Rehabilita on of current District Hospitals, and expansion of the number of these in strategic districts

 Rehabilita on of Strategic Provincial/Regional Hospitals

 Rehabilita on of PMGH

 Establishment of a new na onal referral hospital for PNG.

The implementa on schedule is detailed on the following page. While this is designed as a forty-year schedule, the sequencing in the rst ten years will re ect the funds available, and the focus on a back to basics approach and rehabilita on of rural health services.

Figure 19 Health Vision 2050

Facility Type Phase 1 2011-2020 Phase 2 2021-2030 Phase 3 2031-2040 Phase 4 2041-2050

Community Health Posts

Phase 1 (a) Rehabilitate and open Aid Posts

Phase 1 (b) Establish CHPs in strategic loca ons

Phase 2 Progressively replace Aid Posts and Health Sub-Centres with CHPs

Health Centres Rehabilitate all Health Centres to become fully opera onal

District Hospitals Establish one fully opera onal hospital in most Districts over 40 years (note: in Districts without colocated Provincial Hospitals) in accordance with popula on/geographical requirements

Provincial Health Authori es Roll-out PHAs

Provincial Hospitals

Phase 1 Key Provincial Hospitals fully opera onal over 20 years including teaching Hospitals

Phase 2 Remaining Provincial Hospitals fully func onal

Regional Specialist Hospitals Feasibility Studies Establish four Regional Specialist Hospitals over 20 years Extend services and technology as funds become available

Rehabilita on of PMGH PMGH refurbished

Na onal Referral Hospitals New Hospital built 'PMC' Further considera on of new referral hospitals

Figure 20 Health Vision 2050 - Implementation Schedule