no title

Produced by the Department of Personnel Management

"Rise up, Step up, Speak up"

National Public Service

Gender Equity & Social Inclusion

(GESI) Policy

Acronyms

AIDS Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome

AMR Annual Management Report

CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women

DLIR Department of Labour & Industrial Relations

DPM Department of Personnel Management

DoT Department of Treasury

DoW Department of Works

EEO Equal Employment Opportunity

EPSP Economic & Public Sector Program

GBV Gender Based Violence

GESI Gender Equity & Social Inclusion

GII Gender Inequality Index

HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus

HR Human Resources

LCF Leadership Capability Framework

M&C Monitoring & Compliance

NPS National Public Service

OGAPSH Office of Government Accommodation & Public Service Housing

PSGO Public Service General Orders

UDHR Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR)

UN United Nations

WHO World Health Organisation

Definition of Terms

Affirmative Action

Affirmative action aims to identify and remove any barriers which may be stopping women or other marginalised groups of people from enjoying the full range of opportunities in life.1 It results in taking action to minimise unfair and discriminatory work practices and to promote equality and equity in all aspects of employment and other services.2

Bias or Gender Bias

Bias or gender bias is a stated position; an assumption or situation which shows a preferred view or treatment of one sex over the other.

Cross-Cutting Issues

A cross-cutting issue is an issue which is important to be taken into consideration in all policies, processes and practices; usually with a goal to address the needs of a particular marginalised group in society. Cross-cutting issues may include HIV/AIDS, gender, disability, child protection & environment and other marginalised groups.3

Culture

Culture is a complex set of learned and share experiences which embrace the beliefs, values, ideas, customs, languages, and laws of a group of people.

Disability

Disability refers to people with special needs who require special attention, care and support in their families, communities and workplace. And encouragement to determine the full potential in life and refers to the needs created by the interaction between a person with impairment and the environmental and attitudinal barriers he/she may face.4

Discrimination

Direct Discrimination

Indirect Discrimination

Discrimination is when decisions are made based on a person's social attributes such as gender, race or ethnic origin, religion, association, physical characteristics and/or other differentiations.5

Direct discrimination happens when a person is treated less favourably than another person in same or similar circumstances on a ground of a particular attribute, such as their age, gender, disability, race, region, religion, culture, social status or other grounds.6

Indirect discrimination happens when there is a policy or rule or a way of doing things that might appear on the surface to be fair or neutral, but which has an unequal effect on certain groups of people with a particular attribute and the policy or rule is unreasonable. Indirect discrimination is unlawful regardless of whether the person discriminating intendeds to discriminate or is unaware that they are doing so.7

1

Gender Relations, Women's Human Rights and Violence Against Women - (Fiji Women's Crisis Centre) 2

Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Policy - (Department of Justice & Attorney General) 3

Cross-Cutting Issues - (Department of Community Development, Incentive Fund CCI Handbook) 4

PNG National Policy on Disability 2009 - (Department of Community Development) 5

Equal Employment Opportunity

Equal employment opportunity (EEO) means that employees are given an equal opportunity in accessing jobs, training, promotion, work conditions and other career development opportunities.

Equity

Equality Equity is a process of being fair. It means steps being taken to achieve fairness and justice in the distribution of benefits and responsibilities. It often requires programs and policies to end existing inequalities. Equity leads to equality.

Equality means that all people enjoy the same status. All people have equal conditions for realising their full human rights and potential to contribute to national, political, economic, social and cultural development and to benefit from the results.

Gender

Sex

Gender describes the different roles and responsibilities of women and men - what males and females do, what they are responsible for, how they are expected to behave, what they are allowed to do, and what is seen as normal and proper behaviour. Gender roles responsibilities vary according to cultural, religious, historical and economic factors.8

Sex describes the biological differences between men and women. Females and males are born with different reproductive organs - only women have the capacity to give birth and breastfeed whilst only men have the capacity to impregnate women (make women pregnant).9

Gender Awareness

Gender Equality

Gender Equity

Gender Inequality Gender awareness is the recognition of the differences in the interests, needs and roles of women and men in society and how they result in differences in power, status and privilege. It also means the ability to identify problems arising from gender inequity and discrimination.10

Gender equality means that men and women have equal value, rights and opportunities to participate in every aspect of employment and life.

Gender equity is the process of being fair to disadvantaged men or women through specific interventions and actions such as balancing past or current differences that have had a negative impact on a woman or man's ability to participate fully and equally in employment and other opportunities.11

Gender inequality means that a man or a woman does not have equal values, rights or opportunities.12

Gender Mainstreaming

Gender mainstreaming is the process of ensuring that all women and men have equal access and control over resources, decision making and benefits at all stages of organisational processes, practices and policies.

The United Nations Economic and Social Council Agreed Conclusion 1997/2 defines gender mainstreaming as "…the process of

8

Ibid 9

Gender Relations, Women's Human Rights and Violence Against Women - (Fiji Women's Crisis Centre) 10 assessing the implications for women and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies or programs, in all areas and at all levels. It is a strategy for making women's as well as men's concerns and experiences an integral dimension of the design, implication, monitoring and evaluation of policies and programs in all political, economic and social spheres so that women and men benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated. This ultimate goal is to achieve gender equality."

Gender mainstreaming seeks to produce transformatory process and practices that will concern, engage and benefit women and men equally by systematically integrating explicit attention to issues of gender into all aspects of the organisation's work (Morrison - Gender and Development 2010).

Harassment

Harassment refers to unwanted or uninvited behaviour that is offensive, intimidating and humiliating. Common forms of harassment that have been identified are sexual, religious, bullying, physical disability, physical attack, threat etc.13

Health

The World Health Organisation (WHO) defines health as a state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease, injury or infirmity.

HIV/AIDS

HIV stands for Human Immunodeficiency Virus. It is the virus that causes AIDS.

AIDS stands for Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome. It is the condition caused by the HIV virus which weakens the body's immune system. This makes the person more susceptible to other infections which may eventually lead to death. A person who becomes infected with HIV may not show any signs of illness for many years (7-10 years is the average).

Kirapim Wok GESI

"Kirapim Wok GESI" is a gender equity and social inclusion initiative developed by the Department of Personnel Management in conjunction with AusAID's Economic & Public Sector Program (EPSP). This initiative provides a call to action for all Public Service officers, employees and agencies to work together and embrace GESI principles and values throughout National Public Service (NPS) workplaces and in the delivery of NPS services.

Sensitivity

Sensitivity means to have consideration, concern and care about another person and treat them with kindness.

Sexual Harassment

Sexual harassment is when an individual makes an unwelcome sexual advance, an unwelcome request for sexual favours, or engages in other unwelcome sexual conduct in relation to another person; in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the circumstances, would have anticipated that the other person would be offended, humiliated or intimidated.

Social Exclusion

Social exclusion may be imposed by law, result from economic circumstances or from failure to supply social goods or services.

Groups that are socially excluded include the unemployed, ethnic minorities, homeless, elderly, people with disabilities. These groups experience worse health outcomes than the general population.

Social Inclusion

Social inclusion describes a process whereby certain groups in society are systematically excluded from opportunities that are open to others. Groups can be discriminated against on the basis of their sex, age, caste, clan, descent, disability, ethnic background, HIV or other health status, migrant status, religion, sexual orientation, social status, where they live or other social identity. Social inclusion means ensuring that socially excluded people have equal conditions for realising their full human rights and potential to contribute to national, political, economic, social and cultural development and to benefit from the results.

Social Norms

Social norms are rules of conduct or models of behaviour expected by a society or social group. These are rooted in customs, traditions and value systems that gradually develop in a society or social group. It is important to understand that social norms, whilst generally accepted, may not always exhibit ethical or fair treatment of others.

Threat

A threat refers to a statement or behaviour that causes a person to believe they are in danger of being physically attacked and/or intimidated.

Victimisation

In this policy, victimisation refers to an officer or a staff member who has been affected because he or she has formally made an allegation or complaint in relation to discrimination, harassment or unacceptable workplace behaviour.

Gender Based Violence

Violence Against Women Gender based violence means violence committed against women because of their gender. It also refers to forms of violence particular to women such as rape, other sexual assault and sorcery-related violence against women and girls.14

Violence against women is any act of gender based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private.

Wellbeing

Wellbeing is a state of being comfortable, healthy or happy and ties in closely with the World Health Organisation (WHO) definition of health as "a state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease, injury or infirmity". The term 'health' involves subjective and objective elements, environmental and government policy components, as well as individual and cultural elements that all affect the health of our populations. "Health has to do with bodily, mental and social quality of life of people as determined in particular by psychological, societal, cultural and policy dimensions". So if our experience of 'health' is related to our state of 'wellbeing', what exactly is 'wellbeing' and how is it achieved? The term 'wellbeing' encompasses much more of the human experience and describes our ability to respond to or take control over everyday challenges and changes.

Workplace Bullying

Workplace bullying refers to any unreasonable and oppressive behaviour directed at an officer or staff member that may create a risk to the physical and psychological wellbeing.15

Workplace Violence

Workplace violence refers to any incident where an officer or staff member is physically attacked or threatened in the workplace.16

Table of Contents

Table of Contents ...................................................................................................................................... 8 Foreword .................................................................................................................................................... 9 Statement from Secretary ...................................................................................................................... 10 Acknowledgements ................................................................................................................................. 11 Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 12 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................. 14 Purpose .................................................................................................................................................... 15 Background ............................................................................................................................................. 16 What is Gender Equity & Social Inclusion (GESI)? ................................................................................ 18 Why is GESI Important? .......................................................................................................................... 24 The Benefits of GESI ............................................................................................................................... 25 Applying GESI in the National Public Service ........................................................................................ 27 Mainstreaming Gender Equity and Social Inclusion ............................................................................. 28 GESI Roles and Responsibilities in the Workplace ............................................................................... 34 Roles & Responsibilities in Relation to GESI ......................................................................................... 35 Leadership & GESI .................................................................................................................................. 38 Leadership Values & GESI ...................................................................................................................... 40 Action Plan for Implementing GESI Across the National Public Service .............................................. 41

Foreword

MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE

Section 55 of the Constitution of Papua New Guinea calls for equality of citizens in all areas of social, economic and political development irrespective of race, tribe, place of origin, political opinion, colour, creed, religion or sex. This allows for the making of laws for special benefit, welfare, protection or advancement of females, children and young persons, members of underprivileged or less advanced groups or residents of less advanced areas.

The Government is committed to creating a fair and equitable environment that is free from discrimination and encourages citizens to participate in social and economic development. To achieve this, the Government will depend on the National Public Service machinery to reflect in its business conduct principles of gender equity and social inclusion.

Committing to gender equity and social inclusion strengthens our egalitarian values and ethics, the quality of our relationships, the efficiency of our work and our economic prosperity. These principles of fairness, transparency, accountability and leadership are the enemy of corruption, cronyism and stagnation. Above all, this is about human rights and the health and wellbeing for our people.

As a way forward my Ministry has developed the National Public Service Gender Equity and Social Inclusion (GESI) Policy that provides guidance to National Public Service agencies in addressing gender equity and social inclusion issues within their own workplaces.

This policy provides the framework for change by ensuring that relevant values and principles are adopted into our long and short term strategic planning, enabling our agencies to collaborate with other stakeholders to address this issue in the National Public Service.

I challenge all Government departments, provincial and local level administrations and other agencies to embrace the guidelines and principles set out in this policy document. I look forward to seeing our workplaces role-modelling fairness and equality for our people to generate a greater understanding of these important issues for positive changes to our wellbeing and our future.

Hon, Dr. Sir Puka Temu, KBE, CMG, MP

Minister for Public Service

Statement from Secretary

The Department of Personnel Management is committed to encourage and support the principles of "equality" in every aspect of the Public Service workplace. To do so my Department has developed the National Public Service Gender Equity and Social Inclusion (GESI) Policy. This policy provides guidelines for officers and staff within Departments, Provincial Administrations and Agencies to mainstream gender equity and social inclusion into their internal business process and service delivery.

The framework of the GESI Policy was developed from various stakeholder consultations where issues and deficiencies in the workplace were highlighted, workshopped and discussed. From this honest and earnest feedback we were able to design dynamic and flexible strategies to address these challenges. I am confident that this approach has provided a robust base for the development and implementation of this policy. I call on Departmental Heads, Provincial Administrators and Heads of Agencies to acknowledge the purpose of this policy in your leadership role and take ownership of an enthusiastic implementation throughout the Public Service.

We must strive to make a difference in the Public Service and have new behaviours and attitudes reflect a model for our community. Our leadership in this area will generate conversations and dialogue about gender equity and social inclusion flowing beyond the workplace, into our homes, our families and into our society to learn and embrace, moving another step closer to achieving the country's development goals.

John M. Kali, OBE Secretary Department of Personnel Management

Acknowledgements

ACT Public Service, ACT Government, Australia Angau General Hospital

Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) Central Provincial Administration

Department for Community Development Department of Finance

Department of Labour & Industrial Relations Department of Prime Minister & NEC Department of Treasury Economic & Public Sector Program (EPSP) Fiji Women's Crisis Centre

Internal Revenue Commission Lae Chamber of Commerce Morobe Provincial Administration National AIDS Council Secretariat National Department of Education Port Moresby General Hospital Provincial & Local Government Program (PLGP)

Executive Summary

Our Government is firmly committed to the principles of human rights and equal opportunity as enshrined in the National Constitution of Papua New Guinea. By introducing the National Public Service Gender Equity and Social Inclusion (GESI) Policy, the Government acknowledges its leadership role and responsibility for policy development and, as a major employer, is able to positively influence change in our workplaces and our communities.

The National Public Service GESI Policy assists National Public Service agencies, officers and employees to embrace the GESI principles of respect, equity and diversity. Furthermore, it allows agencies to introduce inclusion and equity initiatives in the workplace and into the delivery of goods and services for the combined benefit and prosperity of all citizens of Papua New Guinea.

This policy sets a framework for promotion of gender equity and social inclusive practices across the National Public Service. It is consistent with the guiding principles articulated in the National Policy for Women and Gender Equality 2011-2015 and the various international conventions which have been ratified by PNG. It has also been informed by Vision 2050, the Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030 and Medium Term Development Plans, all of which strive to rank PNG in the top 50 countries in the United Nations Human Development Index by 2050, creating opportunities for personal and national advancement through economic growth, smart innovative ideas, quality service and ensuring a fair and equitable distribution of benefits in a safe and secure environment for all citizens17.

This policy has adopted the framework for implementation and the relevant priority action areas and targeted priority areas for action as articulated in the National Policy for Women and Gender Equality 2011-2015 and the Papua New Guinea National Policy on Disability 2009. These areas are translated in application to Public Service officers, employees and agencies, with applicability to both workplace environment and the service delivery provided.

Developed in consultation with relevant stakeholders, the GESI Policy sets the guidelines for Public Service agencies and Public Service officers and employees in introducing GESI principles into policy and practice and as part of service delivery outcomes for the National Public Service (NPS). This policy applies to all National Government Departments, Provincial, District and Local Level Government Administrations and other agencies.

The Public Service GESI policy has been developed to address a number of issues where individuals are directly or indirectly being disadvantaged or discriminated against, including people living with disabilities, HIV/AIDS, discrimination on the basis of race, sex, gender or other personal

17

Papua New Guinea Vision 2050 attributes. The policy has a twofold approach, focusing on GESI values and principles being exercised in the workplace and embracing GESI values and principles in the design and delivery of our NPS services into the community.

The Public Service GESI policy is designed to develop and maintain a positive, respectful work culture that ensures equity and diversity for all employees and is free from discrimination. In particular it:

 Outlines the legislative provisions supporting a respectful, equitable and inclusive workplace culture

 Provides guidance to all Public Service officers and employees in meeting their obligations under the Public Service (Management) Act and other relevant legislation, policies and guidelines

 Defines gender equity, social inclusion and other related terms  Supports the creation of working environments that are respectful, courteous, inclusive, collaborative, equitable and productive  Applies GESI principles and values to service delivery to our people of our nation  Identifies the respect, equity and diversity challenges facing the National Public Service  Aims to develop a culture where public service officers and employees feel supported and confident in identifying and disclosing barriers that prevent gender equity and a socially inclusive working environment

 Defines leadership, values and behaviours at an individual, team and agency level that support and promote GESI principles  Assists agencies in identifying policies, processes and practices that inhibit GESI  Identifies and defines "mainstreaming", that being the introduction of GESI into business processes and systems (eg. recruitment, induction, training, promotion and performance management) which allow GESI to become a part of everyday business in our workplace  This policy provides detailed information to enhance the understanding of GESI for all public service officers and employees as well as directions and guidelines for workplace strategies to transform workplaces enhancing the rights of workers and improving levels of health and wellbeing of staff.

Over its duration, the GESI Policy will guide agencies in underpinning gender equity and social inclusion in our service delivery and across our workplaces. The policy provides practical and visionary strategies and guidelines for learning and incorporates the review and evaluation of existing systems and structures. These actions will ensure gender equity and social inclusion values and principles are front and centre and an essential part of our identity and what we want to be known for. It will become part of our everyday business and part of our National Public Service brand.

Introduction

The Government is firmly committed to the principles of human rights and equal opportunity as enshrined in the National Constitution of Papua New Guinea. By introducing the Public Service Gender Equity and Social Inclusion (GESI) Policy, the Government acknowledges its leadership role and responsibility for policy development and, as a major employer, is able to positively influence change in our workplaces and our communities.

Section 55 of the National Constitution, whilst promoting equality of citizens, allows for laws and policies to be developed to address the needs of groups of people including females, children, young persons, members of underprivileged or less advanced groups or residents of less advanced areas.

This policy sets a framework for promotion of gender equity and social inclusive practices across the National Public Service. It is consistent with the guiding principles articulated in the National Policy for Women and Gender Equality 2011-2015 and the various international conventions which have been ratified by PNG. It has also been informed by Vision 2050, the Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030 and Medium Term Development Plans, all of which strive to rank PNG in the top 50 countries in the United Nations Human Development Index by 2050, creating opportunities for personal and national advancement through economic growth, smart innovative ideas, quality service and ensuring a fair and equitable distribution of benefits in a safe and secure environment for all citizens18.

The GESI policy supports and assists National Public Service agencies, officers and employees to embrace the GESI principles of respect, equity and diversity. Furthermore, it allows agencies to introduce inclusion and equity initiatives in the workplace and into the delivery of goods and services, for the combined benefit and prosperity of all citizens of Papua New Guinea.

Section 55 of the National Constitution, whilst promoting equality of citizens, allows for laws and policies to be developed to address the needs of groups of people including females, children, young persons, members of underprivileged or less advanced groups or residents of less advanced areas.

Purpose

The National Public Service GESI Policy sets the guidelines for Public Service agencies and Public Service officers and employees in introducing GESI principles into policy and practice and as part of service delivery outcomes for the National Public Service (NPS). This policy applies to all National Government Departments, Provincial, District and Local Level Government Administrations and other agencies.

For the period 2013-15 and in line with the current Medium Term Development Plan, this policy sets the minimum standards and provides a framework for agencies to adopt this GESI policy in its entirety and, where necessary, enhance its applicability for a specific agency or workplace. The policy provides details of specialist contacts and avenues of enquiry to assist in establishing local contacts suited for use in your own workplace.

The National Public Service GESI policy provides guidelines which provide clear direction for practical implementation of this policy within the workplace. The policy is available in hard copy, on disk and available for download from the DPM website (www.dpm.gov.pg). Management and staff are encouraged to have a copy available on their desktops for easy reference. Supporting education and awareness materials are also available for use.

Article 1

"We are born free and equal; we should treat each other with human dignity."

Universal Declaration of Human Rights 10 December 1948

United Nations General Assembly

Background

As part of White Ribbon Day activities in 2011, the Department of Personnel Management (DPM) made a commitment to the National Public Service that it would develop policy on domestic violence in the workplace. This resulted in domestic violence provisions being included in the Fourth Edition Public Service General Orders in 2012. Related inclusion and equity policy statements were also included in this edition, providing policy direction in the areas of gender equity and social inclusion, sexual harassment in the workplace, disability, HIV/AIDS and marital status.

A further commitment was made as part of the launch of the "Kirapim Wok GESI" initiative in November 2012, where the Secretary for DPM made a commitment to the Minister for Public Service to launch a National Public Service Gender Equity & Social Inclusion (GESI) policy by the close of 2012. Complementing these commitments, the Public Service (Management) Act 1995 is being updated to incorporate and reflect GESI principles.

This GESI policy has been developed to address a number of issues where individuals are directly or indirectly being disadvantaged or discriminated against, including people living with disabilities, HIV/AIDS, discrimination on the basis of race, sex, gender or other personal attributes. The policy has a twofold approach, focusing on GESI values and principles being exercised in the workplace and embracing GESI values and principles in the design and delivery of our NPS services into the community.

The National Public Service GESI policy is designed to develop and maintain a positive, respectful work culture that ensures equity and diversity for all employees and is free from discrimination. In particular it:

 Outlines the legislative provisions supporting a respectful, equitable and inclusive workplace culture

 Provides guidance to all Public Service officers and employees in meeting their obligations under the Public Service (Management) Act and other relevant legislation, policies and guidelines

 Defines gender equity, social inclusion and other related terms The GESI policy is designed to develop and maintain a positive, respectful work culture that ensures equity and diversity for all employees and is free from discrimination.

 Supports the creation of working environments that are respectful, courteous, inclusive, collaborative, equitable and productive  Applies GESI principles and values to service delivery to the people of our Nation  Identifies the respect, equity and diversity challenges facing the National Public Service  Aims to develop a culture where public service officers and employees feel supported and confident in identifying and disclosing barriers that prevent gender equity and a socially inclusive working environment

 Defines leadership, values and behaviours at an individual, team and agency level that support and promote GESI principles

 Assists agencies in identifying policies, processes and practices that inhibit GESI  Identifies and defines "mainstreaming", that being the introduction of GESI into business processes and systems (eg. recruitment, induction, training, promotion and performance management) which allow GESI to become a part of everyday business in our workplace.

GENDER

- a snapshot

Papua New Guinean women generally suffer as a result of their low social status. This is reflected in PNG's Gender Inequality Index (GII) as 0.784 in 2008, ranking it 133 among the 169 countries assessed, with the life expectancy of females being lower than that of males. Women also suffer from excessive workloads, malnutrition, poor access to safe water and healthcare service, excessively repeated pregnancies and gender-based violence both at home and in the workplace. PNG's maternal mortality rates are more than double any other Pacific island country. Education enrolment rates for girls compared to boys are among the lowest in the Pacific.

Rates of gender based violence continue to rise with recent research identifying more than 50% of women having experienced forced sex, gang rape or payback rape and women are often subjected to torture or murder when suspected of sorcery.

Women in PNG are consistently at risk of violence in their homes and workplaces which results in impeding women from obtaining financial or economic survival or access to employment. As a result many women in urban centres are increasingly reliant on the exchange of money, goods and favours for sex, either informally or through regular sex work.

Papua New Guinea has made substantial progress by being a signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and by developing the legal framework governing equal opportunity for men and women. Our legislation and policies, particularly the Public Service (Management) Act, Public Service General Orders and the Code of Business Ethics and Conduct are promoting fair employment environment and practices in the Public Service.

As of December 2007, there was only one female national judge out of 27 judges and the first female law lecturer was appointed in 2005. The legal profession was male dominated, with 90% of the positions held by men. Women's political participation was extremely low, rating 119 of a 121 countries with only four women ever being elected to PNG's National Parliament. Today, in 2012, there are now two female national judges, 22 district court magistrates and seven women have now been elected into Parliament, three of which are currently standing. Like all workplaces, the National Public Service has an unequal representation of women participating in the workplace. As the largest employer in PNG, in 2007 the Public Service employed 76,000 public servants. Women held 18,740 (24.7%) of these positions; of these only 12% occupied executive management positions, such as Departmental Secretary or Deputy Secretary. There are many reasons for this, including lack of opportunity and access to necessary information and educational standards, cultural and gender expectations as to women's roles in society and organisational policies and practices that have not encouraged women to enter the workforce. A study conducted in 201119 found that this inequity was further highlighted with a lower representation of women in decision making roles and leadership positions. While there was some representation at mid-level management roles, the numbers of women in senior executive management roles dropped significantly. In one central agency the representation of women at the junior officer / personal assistant level was approximately 54%, whilst at senior executive level there were on average 29% of women holding these roles. The study further examined whether agencies had policies to specifically address gender, HIV/AIDS, domestic violence and sexual harassment and inclusion (or intention to include)gender & HIV in the agency's Corporate Plan. In 11 National Departments it was found that not one agency had policies to address all of the above issues. Five of the 11 agencies had no policies in place with the remainder only partially addressing the issues. This study concluded there was a significant need to implement gender mainstreaming and to integrate awareness activities into workplaces, with reports of a low understanding of gender and other equity issues within the 11 agencies. The Government, as a responsible employer in Papua New Guinea, is firmly committed to the principles of equal opportunities and human rights. As the single biggest employer employing well over eighty thousand people in 2012 it recognises it has the responsibility to provide high quality and equitable services that meet the diverse needs of its employees and the communities it serves.

What is Gender Equity & Social Inclusion (GESI)?

Gender Equity

Most societies allocate different roles, responsibilities and activities to women and men. These allocations are not by virtue of the physical sex of an individual (ie. whether they are male or female). Instead, these are social constructs which translate into learned behaviours and general patterns of social and economic roles. PNG is predominantly a subsistence economy and cultural norms define women and men's roles, responsibilities, rights, access to and control over resources, as well as the interests, needs and identities in relation to one another. Women's traditional roles and responsibilities primarily concern domestic duties - child rearing and bearing, household chores, family and community caring and food production for consumption. Men's traditional roles and responsibilities primarily concern heavier, riskier jobs usually outside of the home - building houses and fences, fishing, gardening and making decisions on allocating and sharing resources.

As PNG has developed over the years, women's roles are changing with many more gaining increased levels of education and opportunities for paid employment.

However in the workplace the positions that women attain are often undervalued in that they do not attract an equal financial or economic value. The work is often not seen to be as important and women are restricted in being prioritised for education and training. Women therefore lack access to career opportunities and progression and are denied subsequent access to positions with decision making power and authority.

Equity is a process of being fair. It is ensuring that everyone is treated in a fair manner, according to their individual needs and circumstances in the workplace and includes the concept of equal employment opportunity (EEO). Equity is about creating a work environment where employees are A workplace culture that embraces

GESI principles and values is characterised by:

 Access to opportunities

 Recruitment and promotion based on merit

 Inclusive policy and practice

 Recognition and acceptance of the principle of equality of opportunity for all people

 Fair and participative decision making

 Freedom from bias

 Transparent processes

 Reasonable adjustments to remove barriers to employment

 Engaged employees performing to their full potential

 Respectful communication

 Demonstrated, more democratic leadership.

recruited, promoted and treated on the basis of their individual skills and abilities. Equity requires fairness and impartiality but not necessarily treating everyone the same way. There are occasions when equity involves a decision made in good conscience to treat a person differently according to their circumstances.

In the case of gender, equity is about providing additional support to women to allow them to access the same opportunities as men. It often requires programs and policies to end existing inequalities, which may include additional training or education for women (as many miss out on this earlier in their life or career) or support in developing and displaying leadership qualities and skills that may have not been developed earlier in life.

Equity leads to equality. Equality means that all people enjoy the same status. All people have equal conditions for realising their full human rights and potential to contribute to national, political, economic, social and cultural development and to benefit from the results. Equality is what we aspire to achieve.

Gender equality is when the roles of women and men are valued equally. The definition has three aspects: equal opportunities, equal treatment and equal entitlements. It is directly linked to human development. Designing initiatives that respond to and take account of the different needs and roles of women and men makes our community more effective and sustainable.

Social Inclusion

Papua New Guinea is a diverse nation, characterised by many different languages and cultures. The geography and infrastructure of the country makes communication and transport difficult. Our population of over 7 million is widespread, with varied access to education, health facilities and other services. There is a large disparity of the distribution of wealth and resources in our country. The increasing rural migration to our major cities is having significant impact for the health and wellbeing of our people and the social disharmony that results from the merging of many different cultures has resulted in violence and injury.

Often people who are coming to the cities in search of employment and economic prosperity also find themselves exposed to increased health risks including drug addiction, alcoholism, HIV infection and ill-health associated with poor living conditions. Disability and illness are unfortunate outcomes for vulnerable and disadvantaged groups in particular. Our policies should take into consideration the diversity of our people and their health, social and living conditions.

HIV/AIDS is having a significant impact in PNG with loss of life, thousands of affected families, including children, and a diminished quality of life for many individuals. The spread of HIV/AIDS has reached epidemic proportions and consequently PNG is rated as having one of the highest rates of infection in the region. It is highly likely that our workplaces have a representation of those who have an HIV positive status and therefore our policies and practice should recognise the rights of these people to ensure their acceptance and that they are afforded the same opportunities as other officers and employees. Similarly, we have an obligation to ensure our officers and employees are aware of preventative measures and the impact that their behaviours can have on themselves and their families and to ensure risk taking behaviour is

minimised.

HIV/AIDS

- a snapshot

Article 19 "We have the right to express our own opinions and to get information"

Universal Declaration of Human Rights 10 December 1948

United Nations General Assembly

Social Inclusion in the Workplace

Papua New Guineans experience competing obligations to customs, clans, religion and professional responsibilities. A socially inclusive and diverse workplace is achieved by recognising the value of individual differences and integrating these into the working environment. Diversity can include gender, language, ethnicity, cultural background, age, religious belief and family responsibilities. Diversity also refers to other ways in which people are different, such as educational level, life experience, work experience, socio-economic background, sexual orientation, marital status and abilities/disabilities. Diversity is more than merely accepting people from diverse backgrounds. It is managing and integrating their varied lifestyles.

Conversely, social exclusion describes a process whereby certain groups in society are systematically excluded from opportunities that are open to others. Groups can be discriminated against on the basis of their sex, age, caste, clan, descent, disability, ethnic background, HIV or other health status, migrant status, religion, sexual orientation, social status, where they live or other social identity. Social inclusion means ensuring that socially excluded people have equal conditions for realising their full human rights and potential to contribute to national, political, economic, social and cultural development and to benefit from the results.20

A socially inclusive and diverse workplace is one characterised by:  A workforce that reflects the community profile  Acceptance and integration of differences in the workplace  No barriers to employment or other work opportunities  Diverse skills and knowledge used in the workplace  Employees not being disadvantaged due to their individual differences  Inclusive policies, practices and behaviours  Work/life balance and alternative work arrangements in place to meet the diverse needs of employees.

DISABILITY

- a snapshot

Based on international research conducted in a number of developed and developing countries, it is estimated that up to 10-15% of a national population will have some kind of disability. This is consistent with research conducted in PNG. We would expect to find, therefore, over 520,000 people with a disability in PNG.

21

Dame Carol Kidu, former Minister for Community Development, provides her views on the plight of people with disabilities in PNG. "People with disabilities in recent times have been totally invisible in all areas and at all levels of the development processes of this country. They appear to be the most discriminated group of the marginalised sector of our population, It is time we changed our values and understandings with respect to those who are disabled whether the disability is psychological, physiological or whether it is a function of accidents or genetics, people with disabilities are people first and they deserve the same set of rights as every citizen of this country."22

Until recently disability was regarded as a welfare issue. The welfare approach defined disability as a problem possessed by individuals. This approach often disempowered and separated people with disabilities from mainstream life, created separate institutions with little commitment demonstrated to involve people with disabilities in national and community life. Inaccessibility to the built environment is still a major barrier which prevents people with disabilities from actively participating in social and economic activities. Women with physical or mental disabilities are more likely to be subjected to gender based violence.

An important intention of the PNG National Policy on Disability is to shift the discussion in PNG to recognise that people with disabilities should be empowered, their rights recognised and that they should be included in the mainstream of social and economic life in PNG.

An "inclusive" society means a society for all people and a "barrier free" society means a society free from attitudinal barriers, as well as social, economic and cultural barriers that exclude people from being full participants in society.

People with disabilities have a right to education and for their skills to be fully utilised through decent work. Decent work is productive work in conditions of freedom, equity, security and human dignity. People with disabilities have unique differences and abilities and they should have the right to choose what they want to do, based on their abilities not on their disabilities.

As the primary provider of goods and services to communities, the Public Service must consider the needs of people living with disabilities when designing and delivering its services. In the workplace, these inclusive and barrier free principles are essential to allow people with disabilities to recognise their potential as productive and fulfilled individuals.

21

PNG National Policy on Disability 2009 - (Department of Community Development) 22

Dame Carol Kidu, as cited in PNG National Policy on Disability 2009 - (Department of Community Development)

Why is GESI Important?

A workplace that is respectful, courteous, and fair and that values individual differences is a core aspect of building a positive workplace culture. Managing equity and diversity is a key component of managing employees. By focusing on building a positive and respectful culture we will enhance the performance of all employees. Fostering a positive workplace environment makes good business sense.

A positive workplace is characterised by mutual respect that supports employee engagement. It also creates a high performance culture that encourages innovation and creativity.

A gender equitable and socially inclusive workforce that reflects the PNG community demographics will also support us, as a Public Service, to understand and assist the various needs of everyone in our community, leading to improved service delivery.

A diverse workplace will have positive and effective communication with its clients based on a deep understanding of the community's interests.

Organisations that value and capitalise on employee diversity have productive and fulfilling workplaces which help them attract and retain employees. This leads to savings in recruitment and training costs, as well as maintaining corporate knowledge and expertise.

In addition to these benefits, embracing GESI ethics, leadership and values provides employees with a unique foundation from which to role model these values back to the community influencing family, homes, schools and social and sporting environments.

Article 21 "We have the right to take part in government, directly or by a secret vote for representatives that we choose; everyone has a right to get public services"

Universal Declaration of Human Rights 10 December 1948

United Nations General Assembly

The Benefits of GESI

The Government is committed to creating a National Public Service that promotes gender equity and social inclusive practices that reflect a positive, respectful, supportive and fair work environment where Public Servants' differences are respected, valued and utilised to create a productive and collaborative workplace.

International experience confirms the powerful link between a country's prosperity and the equality of men and women. As more women are educated and join the workforce, PNG will no doubt benefit greatly.23

Gender equality overcomes stereotypes, prejudices and other barriers so women and men can contribute to and benefit from economic, social, cultural and political developments in society at the same level. Gender equality promotes the equal participation of women and men in decision making; supports women and girls so they can fully exercise their rights and reduces the gap between women's and men's access to and control of resources and the benefits of the development process.24

Socially inclusive values welcome and support people living with disabilities, enabling equal access for those from diverse backgrounds and setting a high standard for the brand of our Public Service as an employer. Our Public Service is one who values fairness and transparency as this contributes to a more humanistic and fair workplace and translates to better service delivery, creating more vibrant and strong communities.

As a major employer of people in PNG the National Public Service acknowledges their responsibility to lead this important initiative and recognises that this leadership and the GESI policy will have wide ranging benefit for not only our employees but may be catalyst for change in families and the wider community. Importantly this policy also focuses our officers and employees towards a more connected and relevant service delivery for all our clients.

23

The benefits are not just for today's women and men, their families and their communities, but for all generations to come.

BENEFITS OF GESI

The benefits are not just for today's women and men, their families and their communities, but for all generations to come. A workforce that is more representative of the community's diverse composition allows us to better understand, serve and meet the needs of Papua New Guinea.

• When girls are educated it lowers fertility rates, reduces maternal mortality and improves the health of their children.

• When women, men, people living with disabilities and representatives from disadvantaged groups participate in policy formulation and decision-making it leads to more responsive policies and decisions and improved distribution of services.

• When all members of the community have access to economic opportunity it helps their families prosper and the country's economy grows.

• A diverse workplace will have positive and effective communication with its clients based on a deep understanding of the community's interests.

• When the safety and security of women and girls is guaranteed, they can more effectively contribute to better outcomes for their families, communities and the country.

• A gender equitable and socially inclusive workforce that reflects the PNG community demographics will also support us, as a Public Service, to understand and assist the various needs of everyone in our community, leading to improved service delivery.

Applying GESI in the National Public Service

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) lays the foundation upon which all other international human rights conventions and agreements are based and this policy takes into account the Articles under the Declaration that concern gender equity, social inclusion and development. PNG has international commitments on the ratification of treaties and conventions in the areas of gender equity and social inclusion, including the Human Rights Charter made at all United Nations (UN) international conferences and GESI-related agreements.

Papua New Guinea has a legislative and policy framework which supports and promotes gender equity and social inclusive processes and practices. Goals 1 and 2 of our National Constitution recognise integral human development and equality and participation. Section 55 allows for deliberate actions and interventions to be taken in order to ensure equal opportunities for all.

Gender equity and social inclusion principles and strategies are key aspects of the Vision 2050, Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030 and our Medium Term Development Plans. In addition there are a number of global and national goals such as the Millennium Development Goals which strive to bring our Nation to an equal footing with other developed nations.

The PNG Government has developed a number of National policies which support gender equity and social inclusion. These include (but are not limited to) the National Policy on Disability (Department for Community Development), National Policy for Women and Gender Equality 2011-2015 (Department for Community Development) and National HIV/AIDS Policy (National Aids Council Secretariat).

National Constitution & Legislation

Vision 2050 & Supporting Strategies

Public Service Legislation & Policy National Policies International Human Rights Conventions & Treaties

The Public Service (Management) Act has recently been updated to reflect GESI principles and the Fourth Edition Public Service General Orders (PSGO) now include clear statements on our GESI obligations as officers and employees of the National Public Service. The Public Service Code of Business Ethics and Conduct also prescribes the expected behaviours of public servants in this area.

Mainstreaming Gender Equity and Social Inclusion

Cross cutting issues such as gender equity, disability and HIV/AIDS can be addressed in the workplace through the practice of mainstreaming. The philosophy of mainstreaming can be extended to people of diverse language, ethnicity, cultural background, age, religious belief and family responsibilities. It can also address inequity brought about by differences in educational level, life experience, work experience, socio-economic background, sexual orientation, marital status and disability.

Mainstreaming requires all levels of an organisation to consider and address the different needs of gender equity and social inclusion at each point of planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluating an Agency's activities. This must be undertaken with the aim of achieving equity and equality for staff and the community. Mainstreaming requires staff at all levels to examine the impact of proposed or existing legislation, policy and practice on disadvantaged groups in order to ensure fair and just outcomes for all members of society.25

In the National Public Service, mainstreaming activities can be focused in two different areas:

 Internal - This focuses on creating, enabling and sustaining an equitable and socially inclusive working environment, which in turn contributes to a highly functioning and well-respected organisation. GESI principles must be considered and taken into account when developing and implementing legislation, corporate and strategic plans, agency programs, policies, guidelines, codes of conduct and behaviour, performance management systems, leadership models, reward and recognition, recruitment practices, complaints processes and feedback mechanisms, conditions of employment, training, budgets and expenditure and organisation and salary structures.

 External - This focuses on ensuring equity and social inclusion considerations are extended across National Public Service goods, services and programs delivered to the community. This not only ensures equity for all when accessing Government services, but allows us to role model best practice to the community in the way we conduct ourselves and our business. This in turn encourages change in the community and establishes our

25

Cross Cutting Issues - (Department for Community Development - Incentive Fund) 2012

image and leadership in this area. This can be further reinforced when selecting our partners, service providers, ensuring they exhibit similar principles and values and a recognised best practice approach. GESI principles must be considered and taken into account when designing and delivering programs and services to the community. Typical considerations include ease of physical and practical access to services, style of community consultation, personal security, communication strategies, monitoring and evaluation of services, openness to feedback and change and commitment to best possible GESI practice.

Mainstreaming initiatives can be utilised as prevention and in response to gender inequity and social exclusion. Through careful consideration of policies, process and practice, gender equity and social inclusive behaviours can be encouraged and rewarded in our workplaces and communities.

GENDER MAINSTREAMING

- a snapshot

Gender mainstreaming is a central strategy for advancing gender equality and equity. It refers to the consistent use of a gender perspective at all stages of the development and implementation of policies, plans, programs and projects.

Gender mainstreaming involves simultaneously:

• Bringing about institutional change to ensure the empowerment of both men and women through equal participation in decision making on issues which affect their lives

• Analysing all Government policies and practices to examine the differential impact they have on men and women

• Providing training and capacity building to enhance gender management skills and raise the general level of gender awareness.

Mainstreaming gender is not about adding a women's component to existing policies, plans, programs and projects. Rather, it is about ensuring that a gender perspective informs the development of such initiatives at all stages and in every aspect of the decision-making process.

INTERNAL MAINSTREAMING

Some examples of how gender and other social inclusion initiatives can be mainstreamed internally in the National Public Service are detailed below.

Appointment & Promotion

 Advertise the fact that you are an equal opportunity employer.  Encourage women to apply for positions or promotions in your workplace.  Proactively provide women with professional development with a view to promoting them into decision making roles.

 Identify and monitor the ratio of women represented in your workplace and at various roles or grades.

 Ensure that there are women represented on your panels and committees.  Encourage independent representatives on your selection panels to ensure appointments are made on the basis of merit.

 Ensure you consider an applicant's ability rather than disability.  Include questions that relate to GESI in your interviews (for example, "As a manager, a woman comes to you with a complaint about being harassed in the workplace - what would you do?").

Conditions of Employment

 Identify whether there is any disparity between the remuneration for men and women performing the same role in your workplace.

 Ensure males and females are provided with the same employment benefits.  Provide opportunities for pregnant women to continue with meaningful work.  Consider options for reduced or flexible working hours to meet individual needs.  Consult with your staff on issues that concern their health and wellbeing in the workplace.

Career Planning & Development  Provide equal opportunities for training and development in your workplace.  Use coaching and mentoring strategies to allow greater equity in leadership positions.

 Identify and foster individuals demonstrating high potential in your workplace.

Training & Induction

 Ensure new staff in your workplace aware of GESI principles and practices.  Ensure your staff provided with adequate education material on GESI.  Source GESI refresher and awareness training for your workplace.

Performance Management Systems

 Include GESI principles into staff key performance indicators (KPIs) and job descriptions.

 Where a worker fails to apply GESI principles in his or her role, it should be treated as an under-performance issue which should be managed or developed appropriately.  Ensure your workplace reflects an environment where people feel free to make a complaint if they are being unfairly treated.

Discipline

 Take prompt and appropriate action on receiving a complaint from a worker that they are being treated unfairly.

 Maintain a register of GESI complaints and as required, elevate this information to your superior officers for action.

Education  Provide equal opportunities for further education to all staff, regardless of their gender, age, social status or disability.

Reward & Recognition

 Encourage innovation amongst your staff in recognizing and addressing GESI issues.  Formally and informally recognise performance in GESI within and across workplaces.

 Actively promote and encourage participation in GESI and social justice events, such as White Ribbon Day and 20 Days of Action campaigns.

Organisation Development  Encourage fairness and transparency in your agency's decision making processes.  Ensure a fair representation of women in decision making roles and functions.  Monitor and seek feedback on your staff's health and wellbeing. Service Delivery  Consider GESI principles when designing and delivering services to the community.  Look for opportunities to integrate GESI considerations and awareness into the services your agency delivers.  Identify and develop partnerships within your community to support GESI initiatives and provide information and assistance. Customer Service & Interaction  Consider the needs of your clients and the community when delivering communication and promotion materials.  Regularly analyse and assess your community's GESI needs and demographics. Accessibility  Ensure your building allows access for wheelchairs or individuals that may have special needs (note: this should cater for both staff and members of the community). Compliance  Ensure management and staff take adequate action in your workplace to comply with GESI principles.  Impose sanctions in your workplace against staff that have not adhered to GESI principles and practice. Reporting  Ensure gender equity and social inclusion factors form part of the standard reporting and monitoring in your workplace.  Regularly capture, access and review GESI data for your agency from the HR payroll system. Monitoring & Evaluation  Ensure your workplace reflects the diversity of your community, including disability, ethnicity, age and social status.  Capture and monitor your workforce demographics and statistics. (eg. ratios of men and women represented in your workplace).  Consider using tools that monitor workplace health and wellbeing in your workplace. Policy and Procedures  Make copies of the NPS GESI policy available to your staff.  Develop an in-house GESI policy or action plan for your workplace.  Ensure other related policies and information are available in your workplace (eg. Domestic Violence, Sexual Harassment, Disability, Code of Business Ethics & Conduct).  Organise policy-relevant research and information regarding disability.  Provide support information, a toolkit and/or response guidelines for staff when GESI issues arise.  Incorporate GESI considerations into its decision making processes and templates.  Ensure staff confidentiality will not be breached when reporting and investigating GESI issues.  Ensure your agency has a financial plan to reasonably accommodate for officers and employees living with disabilities.

EXTERNAL MAINSTREAMING

Some examples of how gender equity and other social inclusion practices can be mainstreamed externally by the National Public Service are detailed below.

Finance



Infrastructure



Employment



Planning



Consultation



Social Welfare



Security



Law & Order



Education



Health



Economic Empowerment



Public Awareness

 Advertise the fact that you are an equal opportunity employer.

 Ensure adequate support systems are in place for victims of domestic violence and sexual assault.

 Train your workforce to understand the principles of gender equity and social inclusion and how it relates to the delivery of your agency's services (eg.

Police attending training on domestic violence and sexual assault).

 Encourage girls to attend and remain in school for longer periods.

 Have policies and programs which support more women attaining higher levels of education.

 Work closely with hospital and medical support services to assist victims of violence and those with disabilities to improve the quality of their life in the community.

 Provide special education and skills training for those individuals living with disabilities and members of disadvantaged groups.

 Retrain police to prioritise and address gender based violence cases.

 Ensure adequate budget allocation and expenditure processes to account for additional costs that may be associated with equitable and improved access and delivery of services across the community.

 Undertake basic infrastructure improvements to ensure safety and wellbeing of children, women and people living with disabilities.

 Ensure your Agency's services are accessible, both physically and in terms of availability, to all members of the community as required.

 Ensure your agency is open and responsive to feedback on its programs and service delivery to allow corrective action and a commitment to continuous improvement.

 Employ a variety of communication strategies and styles to ensure your Agency's messages are received and understood by all members of the community.

 Ensure community awareness of HIV/AIDS prevention, protective behaviours and modern treatment to address further spread of infection rates.

 Obtain data and feedback from your clients and the community about the availability, quality and applicability of your Agency's services.

 Establish partnerships with local service providers in the areas of family support counselling, police and crisis housing.

 Ensure subcontractors, agreements and contracts established with service providers consider and embrace GESI principles.

 Establish dedicated and specialist trained prosecutors who can focus on gender based violence.

 Provide guidance in job placement for people with special needs or the disadvantaged.

Service Delivery  Legislation  Fisheries & Agriculture  Mining & Resources  Environment  Sports & Recreation  Defence  Community  Records Management  Rural Development  Strengthen support for provincial and self-help organisations - the effectiveness of such groups will be enhanced through partnerships with provincial administrations, local level government and central agencies.  Target participation by women and other disadvantaged groups in your external service delivery.  Make condoms readily available to staff and the community to help stop the spread of HIV//AIDS.  Strengthen community-based rehabilitation services and make assistance devices available to those who require them.  Ensure all members of the community receive equal opportunities for education, health and employment.  Review labour policies and laws to better assist the employment of women, people living with disabilities and other disadvantaged groups.  Develop protective gender-sensitive legislation and policy.  Develop and support male role model and change agent programs.  Develop vocational training, coaching and mentoring for women and girls.  Implement proactive programs to accelerate girls' education and training.  Provide functional literacy programs.  Advocate prevention of violence against women and prevent any custom, tradition or religious consideration from interfering with its eradication.  Ensure women's right to maternity leave with pay or to adequate social security benefits without loss of employment, seniority or social allowances.  Ensure that women and men can choose on an equal basis to work full-time or part-time.  Change traditional attitudes and stereotypes relating to women being subordinate to men, including those that perpetuate widespread practices involving violence against women.  Protect girls from forced marriages, bride-price related violence and other traditional practices harmful to women.  Improve business services, training and improved access to markets.  Provide business services, training and technology, particularly to low income women.  Undertake research on the barriers to economic empowerment faced by women, including the relationships between paid and unpaid work.

GESI Roles and Responsibilities in the Workplace

To effectively embed GESI principles, practices and behaviour in an agency, all management and staff should take responsibility for spearheading, supporting and sustaining GESI initiatives in the workplace. This can be assisted through the establishment and clear definition of roles and responsibilities in relation to GESI.

GESI Focal Points

It is recommended that agencies develop a network of advocates; a group of individuals who have collective motivation and interest in the import work of GESI. These are referred to as GESI focal points (in some agencies these have been referred to as gender focal points). In their roles, the GESI focal points are advocates for change. GESI focal points and GESI focal point committees work voluntarily in collaboration with others, actively seeking out learning and education around the theme of GESI and its implication for their agency or workplace.

The GESI focal points may be part of a specialist GESI community of practice who meet regularly to discuss their experiences and best practice in meeting the challenges of GESI. This can be undertaken at a national, provincial or local level.

The role of these focal points is not to take full responsibility for GESI work but to act as a catalyst in supporting and promoting GESI related initiatives within the Agency.

GESI focal points may assist and become involved in implementation of activities but their contribution can also be focused on helping colleagues and management to identify strategies and work methods that will enable and further build capacity of others to integrate GESI principles into their own areas of work. It is critical that GESI is the responsibility of everyone in the workplace.

In their roles the GESI focal points are advocates for change, however it is critical that GESI is the responsibility of everyone in the workplace.

GESI Focal Points - Working to Influence Change

The GESI focal point members and committees may engage in dialogue, make approaches to and recommendations for management to better work with GESI principles and practice.

GESI focal point members and committee are encouraged to work collaboratively with the community and outside agencies in their work; identifying working partnerships, knowledge and learning.

When advocating on behalf of GESI principles and practice, it should be very clear that criminal harassment and gender violence must be reported to the police whilst workplace bullying and breach of ethical standards and guidelines must be actioned appropriately through supervisors.

Actions taken to address GESI issues may range from informal meetings and dialogue to formal reporting and action through the recognised procedures and in accordance with the Public Service General Orders. Thorough notes should be kept in terms of any incident or notification to ensure timely and accurate records are available if necessary.

Article 2

"We should not discriminate against any other group of people"

Universal Declaration of Human Rights 10 December 1948

United Nations General Assembly

Roles & Responsibilities in Relation to GESI

Agency Heads  Implement the NPS GESI policy within the Agency.  Demonstrate a commitment and support for GESI principles and practices within their Agency.  Have an "open door policy" in seeking and receiving feedback in regard to GESI matters.  Support and sponsor staff with initiatives, opportunities and resources to progress GESI within the Agency.  Hold management accountable for implementation and upholding of GESI principles and practices.  Ensure investigations are undertaken and take necessary disciplinary action against officers and employees who fail to adhere to GESI principles and practices, in line with the Public Service General Orders.  Support the Agency's GESI focal point network and its role.  Actively promote and celebrate the Agency's GESI successes.  Ensure strong links between GESI principles and the Agency's strategic plans.

Senior Executives, FAS & Supervisors  Investigate and act upon GESI complaints.  Provide leadership on the implementation of the NPS GESI policy and practice.  Demonstrate and consistently model appropriate GESI behaviours and practices.  Foster a working environment where GESI issues can be raised and addressed.  Build GESI considerations into Agency decision-making processes and service delivery considerations.

HR Manager / HR Branch  Provide awareness training and training for staff on GESI and undertaking ongoing risk management and analysis.  Ensure all new staff are informed and made aware of their GESI obligations and responsibilities.  Regularly analyze workforce demographics and statistics from a GESI perspective.  Make available information on resources for counseling, support and assistance for staff dealing with GESI issues.  Facilitate and assist in investigating GESI complaints and ensuring appropriate action is taken.  Maintain and ensure confidentiality of records of reported GESI complaints and any actions taken.

Public Service Officers & Employees  Show courtesy and treat all others with respect.  Undertake duties in a way that is fair and inclusive by acknowledging the skills, abilities and background of others.  Do not tolerate and actively prevent any forms of workplace bullying, harassment and/or discrimination.  Bring to the attention of your manager any incidents of workplace bullying, harassment and/or discrimination.  Support GESI actions initiatives undertaken by the Agency.  Recognize the need to be open-minded and listen to the views of others.  Contribute to a positive and supportive workplace culture.  Demonstrate and promote positive GESI behaviors when dealing with colleagues, clients and the community.

GESI Focal Points  Think strategically about where GESI efforts and available resources should be focused.  Identify and take advantage of opportunities, contacts and entry points to mainstream GESI in the agency

 Help colleagues seek out partners and stakeholders to support GESI work both internally and externally.  Mobilise resources and take on the role of a help desk for GESI in the agency or work unit.  Providing advocacy for mainstreaming in the organisations.  Provide expert consultation into development of agency-based and local level action plans.  Forging partnerships with law and justice, community support agencies (for example, safe housing such as Meri Seif Ples, counselling services, church charity groups).  Assisting with the development of monitoring and reporting systems for mainstreaming into the agency.  Contribute through sharing knowledge, facilitate and support training to strengthen gender mainstreaming skills and knowledge.

Department of Personnel Management  Regularly review and update the National Public Service GESI Policy.  Ensure Agencies and Agency Heads are meeting their GESI obligations.  Ensure GESI considerations are incorporated into monitoring and compliance activities.  Make GESI communications and support material available for use and implementation by Agencies.  Regularly monitor, review and report National Public Service demographics and statistics from a GESI perspective.  Provide support and assistance to Agencies in implementing GESI policies and practices.

Your Rights & Responsibilities as a Public Service Officer or Employee

As an officer or employee of the National Public Service you have the right to conduct your work in an environment which is free from discrimination or harassment and one that supports your health and wellbeing. You should expect to be provided with respect, dignity and meaningful work and equal opportunities for learning and education to equip you for advancement in your chosen career.

Should you experience any form of disadvantage you have the right to lodge a grievance and such grievance shall be handled in a confidential, respectful and appropriate manner, having attention to the principles of natural justice and fairness.

If you are an officer receiving a GESI complaint, you are obliged to handle such matters in a prompt and confidential manner and to take accountable action to address the issue and document your actions. Failing to abide by this policy can leave an employee subjected to disciplinary action as per the Public Service General Orders and Code of Business Ethics and Conduct. Domestic violence and assault is a crime and must be referred to the Police.

Leadership & GESI

A Public Service ethics and values-based Leadership Capability Framework (LCF) has recently been developed and will become incorporated and embedded across the National Public Service. It is a home-grown policy and is derived from our Constitution, PNG traditional leadership values, Christian leadership values and modern organisational leadership and management values. It provides a platform for the strategic, systematic and integrated application of human resource management processes including workforce planning, job design and description, recruitment, performance management, succession planning, leadership development and broader institutional development initiatives. Given that leadership is at the forefront of any meaningful change initiative, this framework will provide particular assistance to development of workplace policy and practice with respect to GESI.

The Leadership Capability Framework contains six (6) values underpinned by ten (10) capability clusters. Each cluster has leadership and management skills, knowledge and behaviours expected of a modern leader.

Through the Framework, it is intended that Public Service leaders at all levels will commit to embrace, demonstrate and cascade the following six leadership values.

It is through these values that Public Service leaders and managers will be able to:

 Role model ethical behaviour

 Lead with personal drive, commitment and resilience

 Provide strategic direction

 Promote change and innovation

 Communicate with influence and political awareness

 Build collaborative relationships

 Build staff capability and commitment

 Plan and monitor work tasks for goal achievement

 Promote effective and efficient service delivery

 Support institutional strengthening.

Responsibility Honesty Integrity Respect Wisdom Accountability

Values, especially respect, are implied in Papua New Guinea's Constitution in the National Goals and Directive Principles. Therefore values are not only important from an ethical point of view; they have legal and moral weight. They are more than aspirational; they are mandatory.

This Leadership Capability Framework applies to all Public Servants, not just appointed leaders. Every day, every one of us meets life situations which call for thought, decision and action. Everything we do, every decision and every action is based on a conscious or unconscious set of values-personal principles and standards, or important and enduring beliefs or ideals shared by the members of a culture about what is good or desirable and what is not. Simply, values are the things or ideas that people hold dear.

All Public Service employees are required to uphold the values at all times. Agency heads and other senior Public Servants have additional responsibilities - to promote the values - as well as uphold them. Leadership is a critical component of good corporate governance and facilitates the way essential values are institutionalised. Leaders achieve results but they are also the people who solve problems faced in a specific environment. The success of GESI in our National Public Service will call upon all of us to embrace and demonstrate these leadership values.

Leadership Values & GESI

The six core values embedded in the Leadership Capability Framework are directly relevant to GESI and can be applied to a range of strategies, actions and behaviours.

HONESTY

: Behaviour that is consistent with principles of fairness and transparency offering feedback and dialogue in a reflective manner for learning and better practice when dealing with GESI issues. For example, this may be demonstrated by declaring a conflict of interest in a recruitment exercise where you are known to the applicant and may be biased or unfair in your decision, resulting in one person gaining an unfair advantage over another.

INTEGRITY:

Steadfast adherence to moral and ethical principles in private and public life, in a manner that role models respect, trust and a sense of dependability. One way this may be demonstrated is by stepping in or standing up for a woman who may be subjected to sexual harassment, violence or intimidating behaviour.

ACCOUNTABILITY:

Taking ownership for one's own actions and accepting responsibility for the actions of individuals, groups and the organisation. This can be demonstrated by recording faithfully incidents or problems within the workplace in regard to breaches of GESI policy or practice and ensuring appropriate reporting and/or action is taken in this regard. Role modelling GESI principles in your own behaviour is another useful way to promote and encourage accountability in others.

RESPECT:

An intrinsic human trait that promotes a positive, consensus-based and relationship focused collaboration between individuals, community and organisations and emphasising a positive regard for the rule of law in the workplace and all environments. Equal treatment of all individuals regardless of gender, disability, HIV/AIDS status or social issues demonstrates respect.

WISDOM:

A capacity for deeper level understanding of issues involving discernment, intuition, experience and maturity; and the ability to inspire and encourage action to overcome challenges for the advancement and of all people in accordance with GESI principles and practice. Learning from issues that have been encountered and changing our policies and practices to address GESI shortfalls is one way of demonstrating wisdom in this regard. Similarly wisdom can be recognising the accepted way of doing something may not be the right way and taking action to change things accordingly.

RESPONSIBILITY:

Accepting stewardship for people and country; being guided by conscience; actively making choices for the greater good; considering the implications of decisions and dealing with their consequences and developing capacity in others. Having the moral strength and courage to step forward and take action where inequity is identified demonstrates a clear sense of responsibility.

ACTION PLAN FOR IMPLEMENTING GENDER EQUALITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACROSS THE NATIONAL PUBLIC SERVICE

Action Plan for Implementing GESI across the NPS

Whilst the definitions, guidelines and information contained within the National Public Service GESI policy can support the changes in leadership, attitudes and behaviours we want to see in our workplaces, for this change to be sustainable it will need some clear actions and responsibilities taken.

The following plan incorporates a series of priority actions to be taken across the National Public Service in the following areas:  Employment

 Women in Decision Making  Gender Based Violence  Education & Training  Health & Wellbeing  HIV/AIDS  Economic Empowerment.

Agencies are requested to cooperate with DPM in taking responsibility for the various actions. In turn, DPM will maintain a monitoring and compliance (M&C) role to ensure progress. This will be done through a combination of audits, agency reporting through the Annual Management Report process and other monitoring and evaluation techniques as necessary.

Issue Legislation and policies may not reflect GESI principles and values.

Outcome By 2015 Public Service Legislation and policy reflects GESI principles and values.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Public Service (Management) Act, Public Service General Orders and Corporate Planning Guide are reviewed to ensure GESI principles & values are reflected. DPM 100% legislation and policies reviewed and updated Q2 2013

All other relevant NPS legislation to be reviewed to ensure GESI principles and values are reflected. DPM in partnership with Agencies 100% relevant legislation and policies developed over the life of the GESI Policy Ongoing to Q4 2015

Toolkit to be developed to support implementation of GESI policy at agency and workplace level - developed toolkit to contain practical guidelines and support material for mainstreaming GESI in the workplace. DPM Toolkit developed and distributed to all agencies Q3 2013

Inclusion of GESI actions and outcomes in Agency Annual Management Reports. Agencies AMR reporting requires attention to GESI actions undertaken Q4 2013

Treasury to include budget funding for GESI compliance and activities and service delivery at agency level. DoT Budget to include appropriate funding at agency level Q3 2013 for 2014 budget

DLIR to examine all labour legislation and awards to ensure compliance to international conventions and human rights framework. DLIR Labour legislation and awards have been reviewed and an action plan developed to ensure compliance with International Conventions and Human Rights Frameworks Ongoing to Q4 2015

Occupational Safety & Health (OSH) legislation addresses GESI in terms of safety, accessibility and wellbeing of workers. DLIR Occupational Safety & Health is reviewed and recommendations provided for amendments Ongoing to Q4 2015

Issue The representation of people working in the NPS is not reflective of the demographic of the community, having regard to women, people living with disabilities and those from diverse or disadvantaged backgrounds.

Outcome The NPS provides opportunity and accessibility of employment for those living with disabilities, diverse or disadvantaged groups.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Mainstreaming GESI principles and practices into job descriptions, recruitment, advertising, panel selection, promotion, performance management and reward and recognition. Agencies Policies demonstrating GESI Q2 2015

Suitable access and support mechanisms available to meet the needs of this group. Agencies Appropriate access and support mechanisms available to employees Q2 2015

Priority Action Area - Employment (Consultation & Learning)

Issue Service delivery focused on GESI to the community by the NPS is not appropriately coordinated or informed by learning from external stakeholders and sponsors.

Outcome Service delivery by the NPS is informed and improved by high level consultation with community stakeholders such as NGOS to identify needs and cross over, partnerships.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Establishment of high level steering committee consisting of internal and external agencies and stakeholder representation including NGOs and funding agencies. Committee to focus on:  Terms of reference  Scope of work and projects currently undertaken  Updates and information about work being undertaken  Sharing of knowledge with regard to needs and perspectives for improved service delivery. DPM to lead High level steering committee established Q2 2014

Issue

There is insufficient support and resourcing in NPS agencies to effectively and sustainably mainstream GESI principles and practices.

Outcome

GESI principles and practices are effectively and mainstreamed within agencies.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Investigate and prepare a suitable business case for the establishment of formally appointed GESI roles and responsibilities within agencies across the National Public Service.

DPM in consultation with agencies Business Case prepared and submitted for funding and resourcing consideration

Q2 2014

Priority Action Area - Women in Decision Making

Issue

There is not equal representation of women in the NPS and in decision making roles.

Outcome

The number of women represented across the National Public Service is increased by 15% by 2015 and an increased number of women are represented in decision making roles.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Capture baseline data regarding female representation within agencies and decision-making roles and develop an ongoing data analysis framework.

DPM and Agencies Baseline data collected

Framework and accessibility available to agencies and reported upon regularly

Q2 2013

Strategies to be adopted to encourage and nurture more women into the NPS to support affirmative action (equity):

 Monitoring of the representation of women in leadership/decision making roles

 Training/development, education mentoring and coaching strategies Agency

Responsibility Strategies employed to be reported in AMR

Q4 2013, 2014, 2015

to be adopted to provide opportunities for women to progress into leadership and decision making roles  GESI focal points and colleges to provide a leadership and mentoring role  Higher level sponsorship and mentoring to be provided by executive level management to women identified as having potential for appointed leadership roles  Mainstreaming GESI principles and practices into job descriptions, recruitment, advertising, panel selection, promotion, performance management and reward and recognition.

Priority Area - Gender Based Violence (GBV)

Issue

Women experience elevated levels of gender based violence that affects their health and wellbeing in the workplace and is a human rights issue.

Outcome

Improved performance and level of health and wellbeing in the work place for men and women.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Development of a local workplace gender violence plan focusing on:  Best practice responses from management  How to respond to reports of workplace harassment and assault  Liaison points with local support and law and justice professionals  Adequate referral to support agencies  Strong leadership and responses taking appropriate action on complaints

 Appropriate discipline or legal actions against perpetrators  Managing the workplace environment to best prevent harassment or assault and protection of workers from perpetrators.

Agencies with assistance of DPM

More GBV reports being dealt with appropriately by management

Improved feeling of health and wellbeing in the workplace as self-reported by officers and staff

Q2 2014

Issue Management and staff are not aware of GESI principles and values.

Outcome Management and staff have a better understanding and demonstrate an adherence in the workplace to GESI values and principles.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

A combination of education, training and learning strategies which may include: i. Targeted Information sessions conducted for executive leadership, management and staff DPM and agency to coordinate GESI awareness road shows conducted across all regions Ongoing education and training provided and reported annually in AMR Employees to attend one information session per year report in AMR Q2 2013 Q4 2013, 2014, 2015

ii. Individual work place assessments conducted, the results of which will guide the provision of further learning and:  Individual mentoring and coaching  Leadership  Management  Decision making information sessions Agencies Assessments to be conducted throughout the NPS (number of assessments to be established) Progress reported on in AMR Q4 2013, 2014, 2015

iii. Posters and awareness material with media and public relations focus to be disseminated across NPS and the community DPM and Agencies Posters, policies and awareness materials to be displayed in workplace Communication plans in place as required Q4 2013, 2014, 2015

iv. Toolkit development and distribution DPM and Agencies GESI tool kits distributed to all NPS workplaces. Progress reported in AMR. Tok Pisin and Motu versions of toolkit and policy available. Q3 2013 Q2 2014

v. Future development projects to support education and training including consideration of: DPM with agency input Progress on development of training and education to be reported in AMR Ongoing

 Train-the-trainer training  Development of web based information and training package  Respectful relationships underpinning management, communication, feedback and decision making.

Annual forum/conference for agency heads to discuss initiatives and report on progress that may also encompass reward and recognition opportunities. DPM Agency Heads Progress on development of training and education to be reported in AMR Q4 2013, 2014, 2015

Priority Action Area - Health & Wellbeing (NPS Workplaces)

Issue

Women, those living with disability and persons of diverse backgrounds and culture are experiencing lower levels of health and wellbeing in their workplaces in the NPS.

Outcome

Improved levels of health and wellbeing for all people in the NPS.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

 Implementing Mainstreaming of GESI principles and practices in policy and practices.

 Continued education and training.  Reinforcement of non-discrimination policies and practices.  Improved communication, leadership and management practices.

DPM and Agencies Improved levels of health and well-being as indicated through monitoring and evaluation interviews in workplaces

Q4 2013, 2014, 2015

Issue Government owned and leased buildings and infrastructure not allowing access for employees and members of the community living with disability.

Outcome Government owned and leased buildings and infrastructure are assessed for accessibility for all members of the community.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Assessments to be undertaken regarding accessibility to buildings and infrastructure. All new leases signed and building approvals must comply with GESI principles. DPM (OGAPSH) in consultation with DOW and DLIR Progress to be reported in AMR Q4 2014

Priority Action Area - HIV/AIDS

Issue People working in the NPS do not have a high level of awareness of HIV/AIDS causes, cures or prevention and discrimination exists against individuals who are HIV positive.

Outcome All officers and staff understand the causes, cures and preventative methods of contracting HIV/AIDS and do not discriminate against individuals who are HIV positive.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Awareness and action guidelines packages to be developed at an agency and workplace level to include information:  On cause and transmission  Prevention  How to obtain tests locally  Instructions on discrimination in the workplace. Communication materials such as posters and access information to be displayed. Agency with support from DPM Progress to be reported in the AMR Reporting annually Q4 2013, 2014, 2015

Condoms to be made available in workplaces.

GESI mainstreaming toolkit to contain guidelines for the compilation of awareness packages. DPM Tool kit to be developed and provided to agencies Q3 2013

Priority Action Area - Economic Empowerment

Issue Women, people with disabilities and those who are disadvantaged experience economic disempowerment through lack of access to employment, appropriate remuneration or unequal access due to conditions in the workplace.

Outcome Equal access and employment conditions for all individuals regardless of gender, disability or disadvantage.

Implementation Strategies Accountability Performance Indicator Timeframe

Employment conditions to be reviewed with regard to GESI principles and values focusing on:  Wage structures  Conditions of employment  Job descriptions  Staff performance appraisals  Promotion opportunities  Access to leave  Training needs analysis and development  Part time employment  Child care  Flexible hours of work. DPM Reviews and recommendations ongoing and reported in AMR Q4 2013,2014, 2015

Support Materials Available

Families and Children Affected by HIV/AIDS and Other Vulnerable Children in Papua New

Guinea - Department of Community Development (2006)

Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Strategy - Papua New Guinea Economic and Public

Sector Program (2012)

Gender Equity in the Public Service - A Guide for Departmental Heads, Managers and

Supervisors - PNG Law and Justice Sector (2010)

Gender Equity in the Public Service - A Guide to the Rights of Public Servants - PNG Law

and Justice Sector (2010)

Integrating Gender into HIV and AIDS Activities: A Guide for Implementers - National AIDS Council Secretariat

National Policy for Women and Gender Equality 2011-2015 - Department for Community Development

National Resource Directory 2006 -

Family and Sexual Violence Action Committee

Papua New Guinea Critical Development Constraints - Country Diagnostics Studies -

Asian Development Bank (2012)

Papua New Guinea National HIV and AIDS Strategy 2011-2015 - National AIDS Council Secretariat

Papua New Guinea National Policy on Disability - Department for Community Development

PNG - Australia Economic and Public Sector Program Results Framework - Australian

Government AusAID (2012)

PNG Development Strategic Plan 2010 - 2030 - Department of National Planning & Monitoring

PNG Medium Term Development Plan 2011 - 2015 - Department of National Planning & Monitoring

PNG National Policy for Women and Gender Equality 2011-2015 - Department for

Community Development (2010)

Presentation to the Cultivating Communities of Practice - Office for the Development of

Women (2011)

Vision 2050 -

Government of Papua New Guinea

Further Information & Support

Department of Personnel Management

Workforce & Organisation Development Division Ph: (675) 327 6316

Department for Family and Community Development

Ph: (675) 300 8152

Department for Community Development

Gender Branch

Ph: (675) 325 2574

Office for Development of Women

Ph: (675) 301 0269

National AIDS Council Secretariat

Ph: (675) 323 6161

Family & Sexual Violence Action Committee

(Producer of the National Resource Directory) Ph: (675) 321 1391