untitled

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA Nation Religion King

TOURISM DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIC PLAN 2012-2020

Was adopted in the Plenary Meeting of the Offi ce

of the Council Minister, held July 20, 2012

6

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA National Religion King

Message of Support On

Tourism Development Strategic Plan 2012-2020 From

Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN Sen, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia

In the name of the Royal Government of Cambodia, I have the great pleasure to convey message to all dear national compatriots about my will, commitment and intention in favor of the Tourism Development Strategic Plan 2012-2020. Truely, tourism, as a system, is the priority sector determined in the Rectangular Strategy of the Royal Government of Cambodia. Tourism greatly contributes to soico-economic development, job creation, income generation, improvement of people's livelihood and poverty alleviation.

Tourism Development Strategic Plan 2012-2020 showcases clear long-term vision for tourism development in Cambodia based mainly on the potentials of "Cultural and Natural" resources. Cultural tourism is highly prioritized for Cambodia tourism development while ecotourism, a vision for sustainable development, needs to be improved and developed as a new tourist destination, responsibly contributing to mitigating against climate change and toward building up green economic development.

It is projected in the Tourism Development Strategic Plan that in 2020 Cambodia will recieve about 7 million international tourists together with approximately eight to 10 million domestic tourists. Whereby, the annual tourism revenue for national economy will soar up to 5,000 million dollars, which importantly plays main role in accelerating gross domestic product and creating around 800,000 jobs in tourism sector. Above all, it is a tremendous durable advantage that Cambodia itself can accomplish and creates new history for our national tourism. Hence, we all the Cambodian people who are the prospective beneficiary shall altogether support and get engaged in the cause.

Taking this opportunity, I wish to express my will and support with the aim to achieve the above-mentioned vision and ensure equitable tourism benefit sharing to all stakeholders, particularly Cambodia people. In this sense, five main fundamental principles have been set and rolled out:

1- The Royal Government ensures to provide full freedom for tourism business

rs

adhere to free market economy policy so as to increase better business conditions and attractively diversify tourist activities in a warm environment.

2- Encourage active implementation of various policies for tourism development, particularly open sky policy for air, water and overland in order to improve travel facilitation and tourist transportation.

3- Build on cooperation between the Royal Government and private sector, development partners to accomplace the Tourism Development Strategic Plan.

4- Through tourism development, it shall quarantee market for sale of products from local people since tourism is considered as on-site exportation sector. Encourage and afford any possibility for people to get engaed in toruism development, expecially in various community-based tourism sites so as to ensure sustanability of development, protection and benefit sharing, job creation, reduction of migration and poverty alleviatio n for people.

5- Enhance effective law enforcement based on the fundamental legal documents to protect legitimate tourism benefit for all stakeholders and ensure quality tourism development in a responsible and sustainable manner.

In the name of the Royal Government of Cambodia, I highly appreciate the management, officials and all stakeholders of the Ministry of Tourism, Supreme Council of Economy, Committee for Economic and Financial Policy, Inter-ministries, Office of Council of Ministers for having collaborated to get the Tourism Development Strategic Plan successfully adopted by the Royal Government of Cambodia and that becomes the most valuable national document. Taking this opportunity, I hereby appear for all ministries, institutions, local authorities of all levels, development partners, national and international organizations as well as Cambodian people to further support and abide by the Tourism Development Strategic Plan 2012-2020 herewith.

I strongly believe that all stakeholders in the government, private sector, national and international organization, development partners will make use of this Tourism Strategic Development Plan as the roadmap for jointly accelerating quality tourism development in a sustanable and responsible manner so as to raise our national prestigue in international arena and make Cambodia: Kingdom of Wonder become the world-class "cultural and natural" tourist destination.

Phnom Penh, September 04, 2012 Prime Minister

(Signed)

Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN

Thanks Letter From

H.E Dr. Thong Khon, Minister of Tourism

On behalf of the Ministry of Tourism, management and officials, I would like to extend my profound thanks to the Royal Governemnt for support and adoption of the Tourism Strategic Development Plan 2012-2020. This strategic plan is the importantant document for the country and is a roadmap showcashing quality tourism development in a responsible and sustanable manner.

Tourism has been determined by the Royal Government of Cambodia as the "Green Gold" which is an important element of green economy, whereby tourism revenue was immediately inducted into the national economic current, contributing to accelerating gross domestic product. Sustanable and responsible tourism development contributes to the development, preservation, protection and conservation of cultural, historica and natural resources. Moreover, the progress of tourism enhances national prestigue in international arena, strenghtening freindship, solidarity, cooperation and Cambodia intergration into the region and the world.

Royal Government, under the sound and brilliant leadership of Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN Sen, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia, has always paid greater attention on, leaded, supported and encouraged tourism development to accomplish various subsequent achievements. The Royal Government has rolled out policies, measures and strategy to encourage tourism development, particularly open sky policy and rectangular strategy of the Royal Government of Cambodia.

In fact, Cambodia: Kingdom of Wonder has diverse potentials for tourism development based on the "cultural and natural" resources, national unity, political stability, peace and good security. The Tourism Development Strategic Plan 2012-2020 is the necessary document showcasing the strong will of the Royal Government of Cambodia in sustanably developing Cambodia tourism and prioritizing tourism as an important sector toward building up socio-economy in Cambodia.

The Tourism Development Strategic Plan herwith clearly shows the vision for future tourism development in Cambodia based on six strategic directions, namely: tourism product development; tourism marketing and promotion; connectivity and travel

rs

facilitation and tourist transportation; tourism safety system; negative impact management; legal system and management mechanism; and human resource development. In addition, this strategy also shows the study on challenges, risk, strenght, opportunity and setting out strategy, measure and planning and implementation mechanism.

Once again, on behalf of the management and official of the Ministry of Tourism, I would like to extend my heartfelt thanks to Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN Sen, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia for always concentrating, supporting and encouring tourism development in Cambodia. In particular, Samdech Techo Prime Minister and the Office of Council of Minister adopted the Tourism Development Strategic Plan 2012-2020 in the plenary meeting held July 20, 2012 at the Office of the Council of Ministers.

My thanks also go to the ministries, institutions and all relevant authorities, private sector, national and international organization, development partner for providing comments and various cooperation in preparing this tourism development strategic plan. On behalf of the Ministry of Tourism, I hereby seriously commit to increase cooperation with all ministries, institutions and all relevant authorities, private sector, national and international organizations, development partners to further carry out the Tourism Development Strategic Plan 2012-2020 to achieve very positive outcomes.

Phnom Penh, September 03 ,2012 Tourism Minister

(Signed)

Dr. Thong Khon

Message of Support............................................................................................................................... ..I

dŚĂŶŬƐ >ĞƩĞƌ............................................................................................................................... ............III

ANNEXED