no title

1

ACTION DESCRIPTION TARGET/NOTES IMPLEMENTING

AGENCY

Proclamation of Energy Efficiency Act Act passed in March 2011 and sections 1 to 18 proclaimed in November 2011 while sections 19 to 23 were proclaimed in January 2013.

Part III Setting up of Energy Efficiency Committee The Energy Efficiency Committee has been set up. Part II - Setting up of Energy Efficiency Management Office

EEMO has been set up and is operational since December 2011.

Part IV and V - Energy Audits and Miscellaneous sections Amendments to the Energy Efficiency Act has been proposed with new regulations being put in place.

Electricity Act 2005

Proclamation of Act Given that the regulator would also have to oversee the expected Water Sector Reform, the operationalisation of the Utility Regulatory Authority (URA) has been postponed tentatively to 2015 . The Electricity Act will also be amended to include changes that have occurred since 2005.

MEPU

Energy Efficiency Act 2011 MEPU

ENERGY STRATEGY 2011 - 2025 ACTION PLAN - UPDATED (as at 22 April 2014)

INSTITUTIONAL

Utility Regulatory Authority

Set up an independent utility regulatory body Given that the regulator would also have to oversee the expected Water Sector Reform, the operationalisation of the Utility Regulatory Authority (URA) has been postponed to 2015.

MEPU

Observatoire de l'Energie

Set up a data base on energy efficiency Updated by EEMO annually. Latest update is for year 2012.

EEMO

Institutional mechanism for implementation of Action Plan

Reinforcement of technical capacity within the implementing agencies

Ongoing programme.

MEPU/EEMO

Draft standards for energy audits have been developed by MSB.

Regulations on Energy Audit are being finalised by the EEMO.

Draft regulations for Energy Efficiency Labelling of electrical appliances have been prepared. Regulations for registration of Energy Auditors are being finalised by EEMO.

Regulations to prescribe standards for products and standards for auditing

MPI

EEMO

Mauritius Land Transport Authority (MLTA)

Set up and operationalize the Mauritius Land Transport Authority to implement reforms in the transport sector

Energy Efficiency Regulations

Sections of the Act has been proclaimed except sections concerning the merger of existing departments such as the NTA, RDA and TMRSU.

Sustainable energy budget

Establish appropriate budget for the setting up of Energy Efficiency Management Office

Provision for additional staff has been made in Budget 2014-2015 and also budget has been earmarked on an annual basis for continuous sensitization campaigns by the EEMO on the efficient use of energy.

MEPU/EEMO

Standard for Energy Efficiency Labelling of electric water heaters and storage types is needed

Standards need to be developed by MSB

MSB/EEMO

Energy Management Education

Develop professional courses in energy auditing, energy management, monitoring and targeting of sustainable building design

45 auditors have been trained and certification is due in 2014.

MEPU/EEMO

EEMO

Standard for Energy Efficiency Labelling have been proposed for the following household appliances: (i) refrigerating appliances; (ii) electric ovens; (iii) electric dishwashers; (iv) room air conditioners; (v) washing machines; (vi) electric lamps; (vii) tumble dryers; and (viii) televisions.

A voluntary labelling scheme for 8 electrical appliances namely; dishwashers, air conditioners, refrigerators, ovens, lamps, clothes dryer, washing machines and TV is being implemented since January 2014. The EEMO will then proceed in a phase-wise manner with energy efficiency labelling being compulsory as from December 2014.

MEPU

Minimum energy performance standards and energy efficiency labeling

Certified energy auditors

Develop a certification system for energy auditors and energy managers

Two Procurement exercises have been unsuccessful for the appointment of a consultant for the EAMS Phase II. A new procurement exercise will be carried out in 2014.

Targeted incentives

Develop incentives to encourage purchase of energy efficient appliances

A levy, applicable for those appliances which are below a certain threshold in terms of energy consumption, is being imposed by the MRA on some electrical appliances under the Excise Act as from September 2013.

EEMO

Clean development mechanism (CDM)

Secure financing for projects to release 1.8 million tons of CO2 emissions savings per year from:

Two projects namely Mare Chicose landfill gas to energy project and Plaine des Roches 9 MW wind farm project have been approved by the Clean Development Mechanism Board.

MoESD

MPI

EEMO

MPI/MRC

Sustainable building design (i) Introduce Building Control Bill for mandatory sustainable energy design standards for new buildings, including housing, hotels and offices, including natural ventilation; day lighting; appropriate orientation; solar hot water systems; time-of-day and smart metering; intelligent lighting systems that are suitable for low-energy lamps; and building energy management systems for buildings more than 500m2

(ii) Guidelines for Passive Solar Design for buildings <500 m2

Incentives for suppliers

Develop and introduce incentives to encourage suppliers to supply energy efficient appliances

Consultations between the EEMO and suppliers are ongoing regarding voluntary labelling of electrical appliances for subsequent regulated labelling as from December 2014.

Guidelines have been prepared and would be customized.

A sustainable unit has been set up at the Architect section of MPI to promote sustainable building design and energy efficiency in the public sector.

Low-energy consumption

Incentive schemes developed so that existing hotels and rented spaces make use of solar water heating systems, low-energy lighting and appliances. Rented houses/apartments to gradually use low-energy lamps as well as appliances with the highest energy efficiency label. A requirement is included in relevant EIA licences to use renewable energy.

CEB

Sustainable energy education

Introduce sustainable energy topics into the curriculum and provided appropriate teaching materials for schools.

A comprehensive programme by MID including MID Clubs, Green Schools. Curriculum of Std IV, V, VI has been updated to include energy saving measures. There are also ongoing campaigns by the Ministry of Education (e.g. Morning assembly, annual competitions, posters etc...)

MoE&HR

Public awareness

Run programmes as a permanent activity to create awareness of the benefits of energy efficiency, renewable energy and sustainable living, including information on incentives/deterrents and rights/obligations for consumers. A public awareness campaign has been launched in March 2014.

MEPU/CEB/EEMO

MoLG/EEMOEnergy efficient public lighting Implementation of a programme to eliminate energy-

inefficient lamps, reconfigure lighting patterns as appropriate, and address issues such as over-lighting. Standards for energy efficient street lighting systems will be developed in 2014.

(ii) Mandatory energy audits for designated consumers EEMO is preparing the regulations for mandatory energy audits to be implemented in 2015.

(ii) Training in compliance with Energy codes in Building Control Bill

Will be carried out under the EAMS phase II-2014/2015.

MPI/EEMO

(iii) Interim Certification of Auditors (Auditing & compliance)

Certification due in 2014/2015 under EAMS Phase II.

MEPU/EEMO

A tender for the appointment of Consultants will be launched by May 2014 under EAMS Phase II. The scheme is expected to be implemented in 2015.

MEPU/EEMO

MEPU/EEMO

MEPU/EEMO

Energy Audit Management Scheme (Non-residential Buildings)

Training &Certification of Energy Auditors (Auditing and Energy Code compliance)

Completed.

(i) Adoption of Energy Audit Management Scheme (EAMS)

(i) Training in energy audit of buildings

(iv) Training of Trainers in building energy auditing

(v) Capacity building of Mauritius Standard Bureau to be a Certification Body

(vi) Capacity building of MAURITAS as Accreditation body Contingent to MSB being a certification body. Will be done under the EAMS phase II-2014/2015.

Appropriateness of having a local certification body will be considered under the EAMS phase II-2014/2015.

MEPU/EEMO/MSB

MEPU/EEMO/ Mauritas

(i) Development of Guidelines for energy management in industries

Completed.

EEMO/MICCP-Industry Division

(ii) Mandatory energy audits in industries EEMO is preparing regulations for mandatory energy audits to be implemented in 2014/2015.

EEMO

The project document on energy efficiency project for the manufacturing sector, specially on the Resource Efficient and Cleaner Production (RECP) project is almost finalised for implementation.

MICCP - Industry Division

A National Energy Efficiency Programme for 100 major consumers (Industrial and Tertiary Sectors) is being developed in a partnership comprising GOM/AFD/JEC.

MEPU/JEC/AFD

RENEWABLE ENERGY

Renewable Energy Development Plan

Finalize the Renewable Energy Development Plan Included in the Technical Assistance Programme funded by the AFD to be implemented over an 18 months period, expected to start in June/July 2014.

MEPU

Development of feed-in-tariffs for renewable energy power plants:

(i) 50 - 400 kW

(ii) above 400 kW

Study to be completed by June 2014.

(iii) Energy Efficiency Projects

Energy Management (Industrial Processes)

Feed-in tariff CEB

(iii) Construction of a 29.4 MW wind farm at Plaine Sophie Scheduled for completion in June 2016.

CEB

(iv) Construction of an 9 MW wind farm at Plaines des Roches

An ESPA has been signed and commercial operation is expected by December 2015.

CEB

(v) Construction of 20MW wind farms every three years, as from 2017

Contingent on study for the grid absorption which will be carried out by the CEB after completion of the two major renewable energy projects.

CEB

(i) Increase bagasse-based energy from 350 to 520 GWh. Project kept in abeyance.

CEB

(ii) Commissioning a study on the potential of cane residues for electricity generation

Project kept in abeyance.

CEB

Project kept in abeyance. Project kept in abeyance.

CEB

CEB

Wind Energy Projects

The MRC has developed a partial offshore windmap for the west, south and south east regions and the other outstanding regions will be covered in 2014.

(iii) Setting up of a pilot plant for handling and feeding cane residues

(iv) Using cane residues for electricity generation by existing IPPs

(i) Comprehensive wind assessment study and identification of potential on-shore and offshore sites, as feasible, for development of wind farms

Bagasse Based Power Plant

MEPU/MRC

(i) MoLG: Production of electricity from two 1.15MW gas-to-energy plants at Mare Chicose

(ii) Management of municipal waste and composting

(i) Construction of a micro hydro power plant at Midlands dam

350 kW Hydro Power Plant commissioned in April 2013.

CEB

(iii) Identification for potential sites for micro hydro plants in Mauritius

Ongoing exercise at the level of the CEB.

CEB

(iv) Bagatelle Dam hydro component Hydro component will be implemented after completion of the Dam project

CWA/CEB

(i) Preliminary study on the Geothermal Potential of Mauritius

Ongoing. Awaiting completion of Drilling of Gradient Well Project to allow for measurement of temperature gradient, if any.

MEPU

(ii) Feasibility study, including geophysical survey and borehole drillings, for the development of geothermal energy in Mauritius

Will depend on the outcome of the Preliminary Study on the Geothermal Potential of Mauritius.

MEPU

MEPU

CEB

A waste-to-compost plant is operational since October 2011 at La Chaumiere and is processing an average of 180 tonnes of municipal solid waste daily. The plant is expected to be upgraded to 600 tonnes of daily waste intake by August 2014. A pyrolysis (waste-to-energy) plant is expected to be operational by 2015, which will process the rejects from the 600 tonnes of daily waste to be supplied to the compost plant.

Study completed in 2013.

Hydro Power

Waste Management MoLG

(ii) Study on increasing hydro storage capacity at existing sites

Geothermal Energy

(iii) Construction of a geothermal energy pilot power plant Will depend on the outcome of the Preliminary

Study on the Geothermal Potential of Mauritius.

(i) Installation of 5 kW photovoltaic systems in 10 Government schools

Project will be implemented by Energy Services Division in the year 2014.

ESD/MoE&HR

(iii) Setting up of a grid-connected photovoltaic plant of up to 10MW

Relevant Energy Supply and Purchase Agreements (ESPAs) are expected to be signed shortly.

CEB

Sarako - 15 MW PV farm Project Already operational.

CEB

3 MW of solar/wind/micro hydro small scale generation plants connected to the grid (Feed-in Tariff scheme).

223 installations, amounting to 1.8 MW, connected to the grid.

Balance: 150 applications (1.1 MW) in progress. Target for completion: End 2014

A New Policy is being worked out by the CEB.

CEB

2 MW of renewable energy small scale generation plants connected to the grid (Marginal Cost scheme) for Public, Educational, Charitable and Religious institutions.

Out of 2 MW, 113 applications for 1.4 MW received.

As at 18 February 2014, 16 installations (190.7 kW) connected to the grid. Scheme still open to new applications.

Target for completion: End 2014

CEB

CEB

(ii) Installation every two years of a capacity of 50 kW photovoltaic panels in Government buildings, as from 2013

Will depend on availability of funds.

Small scale distributed generation

Solar photovoltaic PV projects

Subject to the outcome of a grid absorption study from renewable sources of energy.

(iv) Setting up of a grid-connected photovoltaic plant of 10MW, every 3 years after 2013

ESD

(i) Subsidy for the purchase of solar water heaters Phase II Completed.

MIDF

(ii) Provision of solar water heater systems in 4 hospitals

ESD/MIDF

(iii) Provision of solar water heater systems in 7 hospitals

ESD/MIDF

(iv) 50% of the hot water requirements of all new large buildings to be met from solar water heaters, in accordance with the Energy Efficiency Building Code.

Being implemented for new buildings (e.g Jeetoo Hospital, Brown Sequard, Mediclinic Goodlands and Triolet) ESD

Grid Study Study on smart grid Expected completion by June 2014. CEB

Biomass - A proposal for the use of Arundo Donax as a source of energy has been made and is under consideration by the MID Commission.

MID commission

Short term (2015): Offshore wind: 1 MW

Medium term (2020): Offshore wind: 10 MW Wave, current, OTEC & saline: 15.5 MW

Long term (2025): Offshore wind: 100 MW Wave, current, OTEC & saline: 60 MW

Ocean Energy

Setting up of Deep Ocean Water Application systems (DOWA)

(As per road map on Ocean Economy) Short term (2015): DOWA cooling: 20 MW Medium term (2020): DOWA cooling: 100 MW Long term (2025): DOWA cooling: 200 MW

BOI

MRC

Solar water heaters

Studies to assess the technologies for long-term options for energy generation and interaction with other sectors.

Request for additional funds has been made by the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life to the MID Fund.

Studies on: Biomass, biogas, Trigeneration

Policy for financing of renewable energy

Define a clear framework for financing of renewable energy technologies

Implemented in a sustained manner with a budget support of Rs 200 M annually for 15-20 years.

MEPU/MOFED

Research and Development Develop research and innovation strategy along with MID framework

A component on R&D for renewable energy is being considered in the context of the Ocean Economy.

MRC

Regional cooperation

Develop regional cooperation in the field of renewable energy and energy management

Regional Cooperation being promoted under SIDS Dock platform, the GOM/AFD/JEC partnership and the IOC project on Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency.

MEPU

TRANSPORT

Lower average age of vehicles

Regularly review and implement measures to lower the age and improve the composition of vehicle fleets.

There is no policy as such regarding age limit on vehicles. However - (i) heavy motor cars and buses over 20 years are scrapped, (ii) Medium age of other vehicles is lowered having regard to an automatic response from the public to replace their vehicles by more fuel efficient ones, (iii) With the coming into operation of private vehicle examination centres, using modern testing equipment, it is expected that vehicle examination will become more stringent, followed by an automatic phasing out of older vehicles.

MPI

Privatization of vehicle examination centre in order to introduce modern vehicle testing systems

Three private operators have already been selected for the setting up and operation of private vehicle examination centres. The project is at implementation stage and is expected to become operational as from mid 2014.

MPI

Bus Modernisation Programme

Create high safety, comfort and cleanliness standards for new buses, which should all be low floor, multiple-entrance, air conditioned models, with minimum fuel efficiency standards and maintenance, inspection and emissions standards

Public transport information

Enhance bus and taxi service information. Public transport information strategy is ongoing.

MPI

Congestion charge

Introduce congestion charges in Port Louis, to encourage the use of public transport, discourage the use of private cars and reduce congestion.

A study is being carried out by the MPI.

MPI

MPI

Control of high emission vehicles

MPI

MPI

MPI

Ongoing at the level of the Traffic Management and Road Safety Unit (TMRSU).

Regulations in respect of Taxi tariff fares have been repealed and no new policy has been declared yet.

More systematic examination of vehicles is expected by the new private examination centres using modern testing equipment. Double cab which are among the high CO2 emitting vehicles have higher road tax rates.

Taxi regulations

Introduce a transparent, published, regulated tariff for taxis, to make them more attractive

Optimise traffic flow

Monitor traffic and travel demand patterns to improve traffic flow, which also lowers energy use.

Introduce economic incentives to choose public transport over private transport.

Regulate imports of high emission vehicles and tax vehicles based on CO2 emissions

Public transport incentives

Proposed grant of Rs 1,000,000 to bus operators to purchase semi-low floor and more comfortable buses.

Introduction of mass transit system

Implementation of modern mass transit system Early works expected by October 2014

MPI

Introduce E10 Legal provision has been made in the Consumer Protection (Price and Supplies Control) Act for the blending of ethanol up to 10 % with mogas.

MICCP - Commerce and Consumer Protection Division

MICCP - Commerce and Consumer Protection Division

Mandatory requirement not being considered for the time being.

Carry out studies to determine whether and when E20 should become mandatory, taking into account the experience of the introduction of E10.

Ethanol

POWER SECTOR

Electricity pricing Set cost-reflective electricity prices. Costs may also include support schemes for energy savings, for Demand Side Management and for renewables.

A new electricity pricing structure is scheduled for implementation in 2016.

CEB

Feed-in tariffs Introduce preferential feed-in tariffs for electricity generation from renewable energy sources for plants above 50kW.

In progress, Consultant appointed by World Bank expected to determine FIT. Target Date: mid 2014

CEB

Introduce sophisticated meters for larger customers to provide better information about electricity use and costs. In progress. About 3000 large customers already on Automated Meter Reading. Target: about 5000 large customers by end of 2014.

CEB

Introduce time-of-day metering and tariffs that provide an economic incentive for customers to move daytime electricity loads to night time, hence increasing the overall efficiency of the power system

This tariff will be introduced as part of a full-fledged tariff restructuring.

Target Date: next tariff revision

CEB

(i) 100MW coal unit 2 X 55 MW coal unit expected for commissioning in December 2016 or early 2017.

CEB

(ii) 100MW coal power plant Project has been shelved.

MOFED

(iii) Future coal / LNG plant Study ongoing and report is expected by March 2014. Decision on either coal or LNG will be taken in the light thereof.

CEB

Redevelopment of St Louis Power Station 4 x 15 MW to be commissioned in December 2015.

CEB

Review of capacity expansion plan and future site selection for power plants

Ongoing annual process.

CEB

Capacity expansion

Time-of-day metering

Commissioning of new power plants:

CONVENTIONAL FUELS

Construction of strategic and operational storage tanks:

(i) Mogas: 15000 MT (2x7500 MT)

(ii) Gasoil: 10000 MT

Low-sulphur diesel fuel

Shifting from 500 ppm sulphur diesel oil to 50 ppm for land transport, making a substantial, and noticeable improvement to air quality.

Completed.

Create energy efficiency programmes such as voluntary agreements with industries; sub-sector technology and know-how transfer projects; training in specialist sustainable energy topics; awareness building, promotion and transfer of know-how; proposals for new financial and fiscal tools.

Resource Efficient and Cleaner Development Centre to be set up

MOT

MICCP - Commerce and Consumer Protection Division

The four oil companies (Total, VIVO, Engen and Indian Oil) have already initiated procedures for the lease of land in the Port area for the construction of the storage facilities. They are in the process of appointing consultants for the technical and financial aspects of the project in view of its implementation.

Minimum stocks of petroleum products and coal

Encourage sustainable programme for Industry and Tourism Sectors

MS 165:2014 standards for Sustainable Tourism-Requirements has been developed and gazetted in January 2014.

Energy audits

Carry out Energy Audits by licensed Energy Auditors for the largest companies and develop energy management plans.

Audits would be regulated. Audits carried out under the National Energy Efficiency Programme, an initiative of the GOM/JEC/AFD Project, which will be implemented over a period of 3 years starting in 2014, expected to fall under new regulations.

MEPU

Sustainable tourism

Develop close working relationships between the Tourism Industry, the Land Transport Authority and the Energy Efficiency Management Office, in the context that fuel security, environmental sensitivity and tourism goals are mutually reinforcing.

MS 165:2014 standards for Sustainable Tourism-Requirements has been developed and gazetted in January 2014.

MOT

Economic incentives to be provided to use sails to complement outboard motors

The Ministry of Fisheries is already promoting such initiatives.

MOF/MPI

Use of wind and solar energy for operating water pumps and aeration equipment

Feasibility Study ongoing.

MOF/ESD

Fisheries sector

PUBLIC SECTOR

Introduce sustainable energy projects for public sector adhering to the principle 'The Public Sector Leads the Way'. All these actions shows that Government is leading by example.

ESD

Provision of 5 KW solar PV systems in 10 schools Expected completion in 2014.

ESD/MOE&HR

Provision of solar water heaters in 4 hospitals Completed in two hospitals.

ESD

Provision of solar PV systems in all Government buildings Ongoing process in a phased manner.

ESD

Energy audits in 100 government buildings 28 completed and 12 annually as from 2014 onwards.

ESD

Capacity building for sustainable energy projects in Government buildings

Ongoing process in a phased manner.

ESD

Introduce sustainable procurement as a mandatory practice for all public services, for example - lamps, computers, air-conditioning and fans, freezers, vehicles etc are energy efficient and have energy saving/stand-by modes and that all photocopiers and printers are equipped with a duplex mode to use both sides of the paper.

The Procurement Policy Office (PPO) is expected to develop expertise in these areas and advise all public sector institutions.

Gender and Energy Use

Study on needs/assessment/capacity building for women especially for the vulnerable groups

Gender cell set up at MEPU will coordinate with the Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare to look into energy issues related to gender.

MOG

PPOSustainable procurement In first phase, PPO is implementing such procurement on a voluntary basis.

The Public Sector Leads the Way

AFD BOI CEB CWA EEMO ESD JEC MEPU MICCP MID Commission MIDF MoE&HR MoESD MOF MOFED MOG MoLG MOT MPI MRC MSB PPO Board of Investment

Public Procurement Office Ministry of Tourism and Leisure

Mauritius Standards Bureau Agence Francaise de Developpement

Central Electricity Board Central Water Authority Energy Efficiency Management Office Energy Services Division

Joint Economic Council Ministry of Energy and Public Utilities Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Consumer Protection

Ministry of Fisheries Maurice Ile Durable Commission Maurice Ile Durable Fund Ministry of Education and Human Resources Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development

Ministry of Finance and Economic Development

Ministry of Local Government and Outer Islands Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare

Ministry of Public Infrastructure, National Development Unit, Land Transport & Shipping Mauritius Research Council

List of Abbreviations of Institutions